ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

2-52         USE OF FORCE 
 
Policy Index 
 
2-52-1:  Purpose 

2-52-2:  Policy 

2-52-3:  Definitions 

Related SOPs 
 
 2-8:   Use of On-Body Recording Devices 

 2-29: Emergency Response Team (ERT) 

 2-65: Interviews/Collection of Evidence at 

2-52-4:  Use of Force Requirements 

Hospitals 

A: General Requirements 

B: Totality of Circumstances 

C: De-escalation 

 2-80: Arrest/Booking Procedures 

 2-3:   Firearms and Ammunition 

Authorization 

D: Objectively Reasonable Force 

2-53:  Electronic Control Weapon (ECW) 

E: Minimum Amount of Force 

F: Unreasonable Force 

2-54:  Use of Force Reporting and 

Supervisory Force Investigation 

G: Use of Force to Effect a Detention, 

Requirements 

2-55: Use of Force Appendix 

2-45: Pursuit by Motor Vehicle 

7-3:   Force Investigation Team (FIT) 

 

Conduct a Search, or Make an 

Arrest 

H: Lawful Objectives 

I:  Levels of Force 

J: Use of Lethal Force 

K: Lethal Force and Motor Vehicles 

L: Response to High Threat Level 

2-52-5:   Use of Force Training and 

Situations 

Certification 

Use of Force 

2-52-6:   Medical Attention Following 

2-52-7:  Use of Force Reporting and 
Supervisory Force 
Investigations 

2-52-1   Purpose 
 
The purpose of this policy is to describe the procedures, requirements, and expectations 
surrounding the use of force by sworn personnel.  

 

 

- 1 - 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

2-52-2     Policy  
 
The Department values the sanctity of human life and is committed to protecting people, their 

 

property, and their rights. It is the policy of the Department to de-escalate situations without 

using force when possible. Officers must remain mindful that they derive their authority from 

the United States Constitution, federal and state Laws, and the community. Unreasonable force 

degrades the legitimacy of the officer’s authority.  Therefore, officers shall only use force that 

is objectively reasonable based on a totality of the circumstances the officer is confronted with 

in order to effect an arrest or protect the safety of the officer or another person.  Department 

policy and training requires that officers not only follow the legal standard of using force, which 

was  established  in  Graham  v.  Connor,  490  U.S.  386  (1989),  but  also  strive  to  utilize  the 

minimum amount of force necessary in order to bring about their lawful objectives. This policy 

is not intended to limit the lawful authority of Department officers to use objectively reasonable 

force or otherwise to fulfill their law enforcement obligations under the Constitution and laws of 

the United States and the State of New Mexico. 

The Department allows for certain classifications of civilian employees to carry firearms and 

less-lethal force  weapons  while  on duty,  including  electronic  control  weapons and  oleoresin 

capsicum.  Civilian  employees  have  no  power  of  arrest  and  therefore  may  only  use  force 

consistent with New Mexico law on self-defense or defense of others.   

 
2-52-3  Definitions 
 
Key terms specific to use of force in this policy are green in color. Hovering over the 
text  with  the  mouse  cursor  will  display  the  definition.  For  a  listing  of  definitions 
specific to use of force, refer to  SOP 2-55 – Use of Force Appendix.  
 

 

 

 

 

- 2 - 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

2-52-4  Use of Force Requirements 
 

A.  General Requirements  

 
1.  Policing at times requires that an officer exercise control of a violent or resisting 
subject to make an arrest or to protect the officer, other officers, or members of the 
community  from  risk  of  imminent  harm.  Clearly,  not  every  potential  violent 
confrontation can be de-escalated. However, officers do have the ability to impact 
the  direction  and  the  outcome  of  many  situations  they  handle,  based  on  their 
decision-making and the tactics they choose to employ. The officer shall consider
and use, where appropriate, de-escalation techniques.      
 

2.  Officers  should  continually  assess  the  situation  in  order  to  increase  an  officer’s 
ability to bring a situation to a safe, peaceful conclusion. This conclusion may be 
accomplished  by  using  time,  distance,  information,  isolation,  teamwork,  force 
array, coordination and other techniques, to maximize an officer’s advantage.  

B.  Assessing the Situation 

 
The following questions help an officer assess the “totality of the circumstances,” i.e., 
the facts and conditions confronting an officer when making decisions.  Officers should 
consider these questions when assessing a situation that may require use of force: 

1.  What resources can the officer use to de-escalate the situation or to minimize the 

need for the use of force? 
 

2.  Can the officer allow the person time to submit to arrest before using force? 

3.  Is  the  officer  using  the  minimum  amount  of  force  necessary  to  carry  out  lawful 

objectives? 

commands? 

4.  Is  the  person  physically  or  mentally  capable  of  complying  with  the  officer’s 

5.  Does the officer have an opportunity to utilize additional resources or other officers 

to bring the situation to a peaceful resolution? 

6.  What is the risk of bodily harm to the subject and/or officer as a result of the officer’s 
lawful use of force in light of the level of threat the subject posed to the officer or 
others? 

7.  Does the proximity of weapons allow the subject to access them? 

8.  What is the time available to an officer to make a decision? What efforts has the 

officer made to gain additional time? 

- 3 - 

7 

7 

 

N/A 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

9.  What are the physical considerations for the officer, such as officer exhaustion or 

injury during a physical confrontation?   

10. Are innocent bystanders present who could be harmed if force is or is not used? 

11. Are there hostile bystanders present who are sympathetic to the subject? 

C.  De-escalation 

 
1.  Officers  should  look  for  opportunities  to  de-escalate  the  situation.  When 
reasonable under the totality of circumstances and where it may be accomplished 
without increasing the risk of harm to the officer or others, officers should-- 
 
a.  gather information about the incident;  
b.  assess the risks to the subject(s), officer(s) and general public; 
c.  assemble resources; 
d.  communicate and coordinate a response; and 
e.  attempt to slow the momentum of the incident. 

2.  In their interaction with subjects, officers shall use advisements, warnings, verbal 
persuasion,  and  other  tactics  prior  to  escalating  to  the  use  of  force,  if  feasible. 
Officers should recognize that they may be able to move to a more tactically sound 
position  or  to  a  position  which  allows  greater  distance  between  them  and  the 
subjects, in order to consider or use a greater variety of tactical options.  

3.  Officers are expected to recognize that their approach to a civilian interaction may 

influence whether a situation escalates to the need for use of force.  

4.  When a use of force is necessary, officers will assess each incident to determine, 
based on policy, training and experience, which use of force option will de-escalate 
or control the situation. 

5.  Supervisors will become involved as soon as practicable in the management of an 
overall response to potentially violent encounters by coordinating resources and 
officers’ tactical actions. Supervisors should possess a good knowledge of tactics 
and ensure that officers under their supervision perform to Department standards. 

6.  A degree of force which may have been justified earlier in an encounter does not 
remain justified indefinitely.  Force shall be de-escalated as resistance decreases.  

D.  Objectively Reasonable Force  

 
1.  The  test  and  analysis  that  courts  will  use  to  examine  whether  a  use  of  force  is 
constitutional was set forth in Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989) and the test 
has been expanded by subsequent court cases.  
 

 

 

- 4 - 

N/A 

6-7 

N/A 

N/A 

4-7 

N/A 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

2.  The  United  States  Supreme  Court decided  in Tennessee  v.  Garner,  471  U.S.  1 
(1985)  that  the  use  of  force  by  police  officers  is  a  seizure  under  the  Fourth 
Amendment of the United States Constitution.  

3.  The  Court  determined  in  Graham  that  an  objectively  reasonable  standard  shall 
apply when police officers make an arrest, investigatory stop, or other seizure of a 
person.  

4.  The  reasonableness  of  a  particular  use  of  force  must  be  judged  from  the 
perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, rather than from 20/20 hindsight. 
The standard of reasonableness must take into account the fact that officers are 
often  forced  to  make  split-second  judgments,  in  circumstances  that  are  tense, 
uncertain, and rapidly evolving.  

5.  The standard of reasonableness in reviewing use of force is an objective one: were 
the  officer’s  actions  objectively  reasonable  given  the  facts  and  circumstances 
confronting  him  or  her?    The  officer’s  perception  of  the  situation  must  be 
considered, along with other objective factors that may impact the reasonableness 
of an officer’s actions. The courts analyze the reasonableness of an officer’s use 
of  force  actions  by  utilizing  the  “test  of  reasonableness,”  which  consists  of  the 
following “Graham Factors”:  

a.  “the severity of the crime at issue”; 
b.  “whether the suspect poses an imminent threat to the safety of the officers or 

c.  “whether  he/she  is  actively  resisting  arrest  or  attempting  to  evade  arrest  by 

6.  Other factors which can influence reasonableness include the following: 

a.  The  knowledge  or  belief  the  subject  is  under  the  influence  of  alcohol  and/or 

b.  The subject’s medical or mental history or condition known to the officer at the 

c.  The  subject’s  known  history  to  include  violent  tendencies  or  previous 

encounters with law enforcement which were combative.   

d.  The relative size, age, and condition of the subject as compared with those of 

e.  The number of subjects compared to the number of officers. 
f.  The subject’s condition, i.e., if it is apparent to the officer a subject is in crisis, 
this condition must be considered when reviewing the officer’s approach to the 
situation (also refer to  SOP 2-19 - Response to Behavioral Health Issues ). 
g.  The  special  knowledge  or  skills  possessed  by  the  subject  (such  as  known 

experience in martial arts or hand-to-hand combat) 

h.  The  opportunities  the  officer  had  to  use  verbal  de-escalation  or  to  limit  the 

 

 

others”  

flight”  
 

drugs. 

time.  

the officer. 

amount of force used. 

 

- 5 - 

N/A 

 

4-7 

E.  Minimum Amount of Force 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

7.  Disparities of force (i.e. differences in factors such as physical size, numbers, gender, age, 
weapons, injury, special knowledge or skills that place an officer at an advantage (positive 
disparity)  or  disadvantage  (negative  disparity)),  are  part  of  the  “totality  of  the 
circumstances” and can have direct implications on the reasonableness of a use of force.  
The existence of a negative disparity for the officer could justify the use of a higher level 
of force in given situation whereas a positive disparity for the officer could reduce the level 
of force deemed reasonable in a given situation.   
 

8.  Officers must be aware that the dynamics of a use of force encounter can change 
rapidly which may affect reasonableness of their current actions and require them 
to  quickly  escalate  or  de-escalate  the  level  of  force  they  are  using  against  an 
individual.    
 

 
When force is necessary and objectively reasonable, officers shall strive to use the 
minimum  amount  of  force  that  is  feasible  within  the  available  range  of  objectively 
reasonable force options.   

1.  Officers need not start at the lowest level of force in every situation. Prior to using 
a  particular  force  option,  officers  should  evaluate  their  objectively  reasonable 
options and select an option anticipated to minimize the level of injury to the subject 
and the officer while achieving the arrest or lawful objective. 

2.  While utilizing a particular force option, officers should continually assess whether 
the opportunity exists for them to safely deescalate their level of force while still 
achieving the arrest or lawful objectives. 

3.  Whether a particular use of force is the minimum amount of force necessary must 
be objectively judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, 
rather  than  from  20/20  hindsight.  The  objective  determination  of  “minimal”  must 
account for the fact that officers are often forced to make split-second judgments, 
in circumstances that are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving. 

 
F.  Unreasonable Force 

 
1.  The  use  of  unreasonable  force  will  subject  officers  to  discipline,  as  well  as  to 

possible criminal prosecution and/or civil liability. 

 
2.  Officers  must  not  engage  in  actions  or  tactics  that  precipitate  the  use  of 
unreasonable  force  or  that  unduly  jeopardize  their  own  safety  or  the  safety  of 
others. Officers shall not use force to attempt to effect compliance with a command 
that is unlawful. 

3.  Any on-scene officer who observes another officer using force that a reasonable 
officer would view as excessive or unnecessary under the circumstances shall, 
when in a position to do so, safely intercede to prevent the use of such force. 
 

- 6 - 

 

 

N/A 

 

 

 

1-4 

1-7 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

4.  A use of force against a handcuffed individual, when required, must be objectively 

reasonable and may only be allowed under the following circumstances:
 
a.  To prevent imminent bodily harm to the officer or another person or persons. 
b.  To overcome active resistance.  
c.  To employ physical removal when necessary to overcome passive resistance. 

  

5.  Prior to escalating to the use of deadly force, an officer must have probable cause 
to believe that a suspect who is fleeing or attempting to escape is a violent fleeing 
felon or poses a significant threat of death or serious physical injury to the officer 
or to others. 

G.  Use of Force to Effect a Detention, Conduct a Search, or Make an Arrest 

 
Officers shall, whenever possible, make clear their intent to detain, search, or arrest 
a  subject  before  resorting  to  use  of  force.    When  feasible,  officers  will  identify 
themselves as peace officers before using force.  

H.  Lawful Objectives 

 
1.  Officers may use force consistent with this policy to accomplish lawful objectives. 
 
2.  Any use of force, to include a show of force, shall be done only as objectively 

reasonable to accomplish a lawful police objective.   
 

3.  The lawful objectives for which force may be appropriate include:  

a.  To effect a lawful arrest or detention of a person; 
b.  To gain control of a combative subject; 
c.  To prevent and/or terminate the commission of a crime; 
d.  To intervene in a suicide or self-inflicted injury; 
e.  To defend an officer or person from the physical acts of another; or 
f.  To conduct a lawful search. 

I.  Levels of Force 

 
Officers shall consider the level of resistance, whether passive or active, presented 
by the subject when determining their use of an appropriate level of force. Officers 
must be able to articulate an objectively reasonable basis to justify the level of force 
used. 
 
This section describes the use of force options available to an officer in situations 
when  force  is  objectively  reasonable  and  necessary.  Each  section  describes  the 
force  option  and  factor(s)  to  consider  pre-deployment  and  post-deployment,  as 
applicable.  
 

Low Level Control Tactics 

- 6 - 

1-4 

1 

5-7 

6-7 

 

 

 

 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

1. 

 a.   Officer Presence – a legally-designed show of force which has the potential to de-

escalate situations. 

b.   Verbal Communication – Officers should attempt to use verbal communication skills 

to de-escalate situations before resorting to physical control methods.  

c.   Escort Techniques 
d.  Application  of  handcuffs  or  other  APD-approved  restraint  devices  to  a  compliant 

person. 

e.   Show  of  Force  –  A show  of  force  shall  be  done  only  as  objectively  reasonable  to 
accomplish a lawful police objective. It shall be reported following the requirements 
set forth in SOP 2-54 –  Use of Force Reporting and Supervisory Force Investigation 
Requirements . 

 
2. 

1-6 

6-7 

5-7 

 

  Intermediate Force 

The use of any of the following tactics requires a Use of Force report and includes: 
a.  Empty hand tactics 

i.  Strikes,  grabs,  kicks,  takedowns,  distraction  techniques  and  proper  arrest 

techniques to control an actively resistant subject.  
 

iii. The  use  of  leg  sweeps,  arm-bar  takedowns,  or  prone  restraints  must  be 
objectively  reasonable  and  shall  only  be  considered  and  utilized  in  the 
following circumstances:  
•  to prevent imminent bodily harm to the officer or to another person or 

persons 

•  to overcome active resistance  
•  to overcome passive resistance and handcuff the subject, as is 

objectively reasonable and where physical removal is necessary 

b.    Oleoresin capsicum (OC) spray 

i.  Oleoresin capsicum is an inflammatory agent.  With proper use, it is meant to 

assist officers in the control of actively resistant subjects.     

ii. Pre-deployment considerations 

• Conditions where it is likely to affect innocent bystanders 
• Possibility of cross contamination in confined or enclosed environments. 
• Respiratory sensitivity of the elderly, infants, or children. 

iii. Post-deployment considerations 

• Where handcuffing is appropriate, subjects should be handcuffed as soon 

as practical. 

• Once control is established and the scene is secure, officers may assist with 
decontamination  of  the  subject.  Officers  shall  ensure  that  subject 
decontamination  by  officers,  EMS,  jail,  medical,  or  other  authorized 
personnel is offered as soon as practicable and without unnecessary delay.    

• EMS shall be summoned in all instances when OC has been applied to a 

person.   

• Suspects who have been exposed to OC shall not be left alone and shall be 

continuously monitored for any indications of medical complications. 

- 12 - 

1-7

 

5-7 

iii. Post-deployment considerations 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

• Common,  normal  reactions  to  OC  include  twitching,  contraction  of  the 
eyelids, shortness of breath, and burning sensation on affected skin areas. 

c.    Baton or impact weapons (using jabs or strikes)  

i.  Batons are considered an impact tool or weapon and are designed to assist 
officers in lawful use of force objectives where such force is authorized by this 
policy. 

ii.  Pre-deployment considerations  

•  Strikes delivered to the head, neck, throat, or spine are considered lethal 
force.  These areas shall not be intentionally targeted unless, based on the 
totality of circumstances and facts known to the officer at the time, the use 
of lethal force is warranted. 

•  Physical  struggles  are  often  dynamic,  rapidly  changing  encounters,  and 
officers are not expected to predict a subject's movements.  Strikes should 
be aimed toward attacking limbs and large muscle groups presented to the 
officer.   

•  Due  to  the  increased  blunt  trauma  capability  from  the  use  of  a  baton, 
officers  will  immediately  summon  EMS  personnel  once  control  of  the 
subject is established and the scene is secure. 

•  If an officer inadvertently strikes the head, neck, or spine, the officer shall 

articulate how this occurred in the appropriate Departmental report. 

d.    Electronic control weapon 

ECW utilization is considered a use of force and shall be deployed in a manner 
consistent with the Department's Use of Force policies and training guidelines. 
Although  ECWs  are  considered  a  less-lethal  force  option,  officers  must 
remember  that  improper  or  unauthorized  deployment  can  result  in  serious 
physical injury or death. ECWs shall not be used solely as a pain compliance 
technique  or  to  overcome  passive  resistance.    Officers  may  use  ECWs  only 
when such force is objectively reasonable to protect the officer, the subject, or 
another  person  from  physical  harm  and  only  after  considering  less  intrusive 
means based on the threat or resistance encountered.  Officers are authorized 
to use ECWs to control an actively resistant person when attempts to subdue 
the person by other tactics have been or will likely be ineffective, and there is a 
reasonable  expectation  that  it  would  be  unsafe  for  officers  to  approach  the 
person within contact range. Refer to SOP 2-53, Electronic Control Weapon. 

e.    Less-lethal impact munitions 

i.  Pre-deployment considerations 

•  In potentially lethal force situations, officers will have a lethal cover officer 

when deploying less-lethal impact munitions. 

•  The distance from which the less-lethal impact munitions are fired will be 

based on these considerations:   
(i)  Manufacturer's recommendations 
(ii)  Performance of the impact munitions 
(iii) Objective reasonableness of the force being used 

ii.  Post-deployment considerations 

 

- 13 - 

 

 
 
 
3. 

2-5 

2-5 

N/A 

N/A 

5-7 

5-7 
 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

•  Once the person is in custody and the scene has been secured, involved 
officers shall immediately request EMS personnel if a person has been hit 
by a less-lethal impact munition.   

  Lethal Force 

a.   Firearms (refer to  SOP 2-3 -  Firearms and Ammunition Authorization ) 

i.  Officers  shall  carry  only  those  weapons  and  ammunition  that  have  been 
authorized by the Department. Modifications or additions to weapons shall only 
be performed by the Department’s armorer, as approved by the Chief. 

ii.  Pre-deployment considerations 

•  Officers  will  adhere  to  all  firearms  safety  rules  as  outlined  in  department 

training. 

•  Officers must recognize that once a firearm is drawn and no longer secured in 
the  holster,  their  ability  to  react  with  less-lethal force  in a  particular  situation 
may be diminished.   

•  Nothing in this section is meant to prevent officers from having their firearms 
in  a  deployed  position  when  confronted  with  situations  which  may  escalate 
rapidly. 

iii. Post-deployment considerations 

•  Due to the high probability of death or serious physical injury when firearms 

are used, officers will immediately summon EMS when safe to do so.   

J.  Use of Lethal Force 

 

1.  Lethal Force includes, but is not limited to, the following: 

 
a.  Discharge of a firearm 
b.  A strike to the neck, head or throat with a hard object that is likely to cause 

serious physical injury or death.  

c.  When lethal force is objectively reasonable and necessary to protect the lives 
of officers or others, officers may generally utilize any tactics or weapons of 
opportunity available. 

d.  Neck holds shall be considered lethal force and are prohibited except where 

lethal force is authorized. 

 
2.  Officers may use lethal force when they have a reasonable belief that a subject 
presents  an  imminent  threat  of  serious  physical  injury  or  death  to  the  officer, 
another officer, or a member of the public.  
 
OR 
  
Officers may use lethal force when there is probable cause to believe the subject 
has  just  committed  a  violent  felony  involving  actual  or  threatened  infliction  of 
serious physical  injury  to  another  person and  probable  cause exists  to believe 

 

- 14 - 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

that  lethal  force  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  subject  in  order  to 
protect the public or other officers from death or serious physical injury. 

 

 

 

3.  Verbal warnings shall be given when feasible. 

4.  Warning shots are prohibited. 

K.  Lethal Force and Motor Vehicles   

6-7 

1 

 

1-7 

 

 

1.  Officers  are  prohibited  from  reaching  into  vehicles,  or  intentionally  placing 
themselves in the path of a vehicle, thereby creating a justification for the use of 
lethal force. 
 

2.  Officers shall make every effort to move out of the path of a moving vehicle to a 

position of cover. 

3.  Officers  shall  not  discharge  a  firearm  at  or  from  a  moving  vehicle,  unless  an 
occupant of the vehicle the officer is engaging is using lethal force (other than the 
vehicle  itself)  against  the  officer  or  another  person.  Such  action  must  be 
necessary for self-defense, for defense of other officers, or for the protection of 
another person, or because the officer has no reasonable alternative course of 
action.  

4.  If an officer faces an imminent threat from a moving vehicle that the subject is 
intentionally driving into the officer or others, the officer may use lethal force only 
if (1) the officer has no reasonable alternative; and (2) a reasonable officer would 
believe the lethal force will remove the danger the vehicle poses, without creating 
additional risks to bystanders. Officers should consider whether the use of lethal 
force creates a danger to the public that outweighs the likely benefits of its use.  

L.  Response to High Threat Level Situations 

1.  Absent an immediate need to act, officers should take time to plan how they will 
respond to the situation. However, under exceptional circumstances, such as an 
active  shooter,  immediate  intervention  should  be  considered.  Officers  should 
continuously evaluate whether their response is objectively reasonable.  

  

2.   Officers are expected to recognize and utilize positions of advantage, cover, 

and concealment, as well as utilize barriers, to maximize their reaction time and 
deployment of resources. 
 

3.  Supervisors should possess a working knowledge of a force array of tactics and 
less-lethal  force  options  to  ensure  that  the  officers  under  their  supervision 
perform to the standards established in this policy. 
 

4.  When an individual officer arrives on the scene of a potentially violent encounter, 
the officer should not attempt to resolve the incident alone, unless it is a violent, 

- 15 - 

 

N/A 

 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

ongoing  situation  involving  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  physical  injury. 
When feasible, officers arriving on scene will secure additional less-lethal force 
and lethal force resources as a part of the force array prior to the initial contact.  
 

5.  Supervisors should manage the overall response to potentially violent 
encounters by coordinating resources and officers' tactical actions. 

 
 
2-52-5      Use of Force Training and Certification 

2-5 

N/A 

 

N/A 

A.  Officers will perform only those use of force options which they have been trained to 
use. Officers will carry only those use of force tools and equipment that are issued 
and authorized by the department.   

B.  Officers  must  complete  and  pass  a  Department-approved  certification  course  of 
instruction on each specific operation or tactic in order to be authorized to utilize any 
department-authorized use of force option. Officers are required to receive annual or 
biennial recertification training, or as directed, in order to maintain their certification 
to utilize any department-authorized use of force option.  

C.  For training and certification requirements and for all training in use of force options, 
please  refer  to  the  current  APD  Academy  and  New  Mexico  Law  Enforcement 
Academy lesson plans housed on APDWeb, and to the Use of Force Appendix. 

2-52-7  Medical Attention Following Use of Force 
 

5-7 

Due  to  the  wide  range  of  possible  outcomes  from  the  use  of  force,  officers  shall 
immediately assess the subject for visible injuries or complaints of injuries once they 
gain  control  and  secure  the  scene.  The  officer  will  monitor  the  subject  and 
immediately  request  medical  attention  if  needed  or  as  required  by  this  section.  
Officers who transport a civilian to a medical facility for treatment shall take the safest 
and  most  direct  route  to  the  medical  facility  if  feasible.    Officers  shall  notify  APD 
Communications of their starting and ending mileage.  

1.  In situations where the subject is forced into a face-down position, officers are 
expected to release pressure/weight from the subject as soon as it is safe to do 
so and monitor the subject for any respiratory or breathing problems; and  
 

2.  Position the subject on their side or sit them up as circumstances allow so as not 

to reduce airflow or diaphragm function. 

 
3.  Medical attention shall be requested immediately when an individual is injured or 

complains of injury following a use of force.  

4.  Medical attention shall be summoned for the following Use of Force applications 
regardless of visible injury or complaint of injury when the subject is in custody 
and it is

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 16 - 

ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PROCEDURAL ORDERS 

SOP 2-52                                     Effective: 6/2/17 Review Due: 6/2/18 Replaces: 4/1/16 

safe to do so: 
 
a.  Baton (Expandable or Straight)/Bokken 
b.  Oleoresin Capsicum (OC) Spray 
c.  Electronic Control Weapons 
d.  Use of patrol canine 
e.  Use of Force with a vehicle (refer to SOP 2-45 Pursuit by Motor Vehicle ) 
f.  Less-Lethal Impact Munitions 
g.  Firearm 
h.  Strikes to the head, throat or neck with a hard object.  

2-52-8 

Use of Force Reporting and Supervisory Force Investigations 

 

 

N/A 

A.  Officers shall report use of force incidents pursuant to the requirements set forth in SOP 2-

54 – Use of Force Reporting and Supervisory Force Investigation Requirements.  

 
B.  Supervisors shall investigate use of force incidents pursuant to the requirements set forth in 
SOP 2-54 – Use of Force Reporting and Supervisory Force Investigation Requirements.  

 

- 13 - 

