General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

 
401.01 
 
A.  Purpose.  The purpose of this directive is to provide guidelines on the use of non-deadly and 

PURPOSE, POLICY, AND PHILOSOPHY 

deadly force and procedures for reporting and investigating such uses.  (Effective 06-01-93) 

 
B.  Policy Statement.  Although use of force is permitted by law under specified circumstances 
and  a  police  employee  is  required  to  exercise  force  under  certain  circumstances,  the 
unnecessary use of force is contrary to law.  It places the representative government agency 
in  a  position  of  civil  liability  and  the  employee  in  jeopardy  of  civil  and  criminal  liability.  
Under  no  circumstances  will  the  force  used  (in  any  situation  and  specifically  including 
against  any  individuals  engaged  in  nonviolent  civil  rights  demonstrations)  be  greater  than 
necessary to achieve lawful objectives.  Deadly force will not be used unless an employee 
reasonably  believes  it  is  necessary  to  protect  the  employee  or  another  person  from 
immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury.  (Revised 06-04-04)  (A 1.3.1; 1.3.2) 

 
C.  Definitions.  (A 1.3.2) 
 

Deadly  force:    force  that  is  intended  to  cause  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  or  that  a 
reasonable and prudent person would consider likely to cause death or serious bodily injury.  
(Effective 12-31-87) 
 
Immediate:  instantaneous; not deferred by any interval of time.  (Effective 06-01-93) 
 
Immediately  necessary:    that  which  is  required  at  the  point  in  time  of  the  use  of  force.  
(Effective 06-01-93) 
 
Reasonable belief:  facts or circumstances the employee knows, or should know, are such as 
to cause an ordinary and prudent peace officer to act or think in a similar way under similar 
circumstances.    "Reasonableness"  is  subject  to  review  and  determination  by  the  chain  of 
command.  (Revised 06-04-04)   

Reckless:    with  respect  to  circumstances  surrounding  the  employee’s  conduct  or  the  result  of  the  
employee’s  conduct,  when  the  employee  is  aware  of  but  consciously  disregards  a  substantial  and 
unjustifiable  risk  that the circumstances  exist  or the result  will  occur.   The  risk must  be  of such a 
nature  and  degree that  its disregard  constitutes  a  gross  deviation from  the  standard  of  care that  an 
ordinary and prudent peace officer would exercise under all the circumstances as viewed from the 
employee’s standpoint.  (Revised 06-04-04)   

 
D.  Deadly Force Philosophy Statement.  The use of deadly force is probably the most serious 
act a police employee will ever perform.  Use of deadly force is contrary to the reverence for 
human  life  exhibited  by  police  employees  who  often  risk  their  lives  to  save  others.    The 
consequences of  the  use of deadly  force  are the  most  far  reaching  for  all parties  involved, 
even when death does not result.  The physical and mental well-being of police employees 
requires  that  they  have  a  firm  understanding  of  those  circumstances  in  which  they  are 
authorized to use deadly force.  (Revised 06-04-04)   

 
E.  Training.    It  is  imperative  that  a  police  employee  act  within  the  boundaries  of  law, 
professional ethics, good judgment, and accepted practices.  An officer must be prepared by 
training, leadership, and direction to act wisely when using a firearm in the course of official 
activity.    For  these  reasons,  each  commissioned  employee  must  be  given  a  copy  of  this 
directive and trained in the  department's policy  on use  of  force  before being  authorized to 
carry a firearm.  (Revised 06-04-04)   (A 1.3.12; 33.4.1) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

 
F.  Administrative  Sanctions  Only.    This  directive  is  for  department  use  only  and  does  not 
apply  in  any  external  criminal  or  civil  proceeding.    The  department  policy  should  not  be 
construed as creating  a higher legal standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense with 
respect  to  claims.    Violations  of  this  directive  will  only  form  the  basis  for  department 
administrative  sanctions.    Violations  of  law  will  form  the  basis  for  civil  and  criminal 
sanctions in a recognized judicial setting.  (Effective 12-31-87) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

2 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

 
401.02 
 
 
A.  Circumstances to be Considered.  The amount and degree of force that may be used will 

LIMITATIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS 
(Title revised 11-01-97) 

depend on the surrounding circumstances.  This includes but is not limited to:  (Revised 12-31-87) 

1. 
2. 

the nature of the offense; 
the  behavior  of  the  subject  against  whom  force  is  to  be  used,  i.e.,  verbal  dialogue, 
physical resistive actions, aggressive acts.  (Revised 09-15-88) 

3.  physical condition; and 
4. 

the feasibility or availability of alternative actions. 

 
B.  Escalation.    Where  the  circumstances  permit,  it  is  an  employee’s  responsibility  to  first 
exhaust every reasonable means of employing the minimum amount of force, including the 
police  employee’s  physical  presence  and  verbal  skills,  before  escalating  to  a  more  severe 
application  of  force.    Under  normal  circumstances,  only  the  methods  or  instrumentalities 
listed below may be used to apply force.  These methods are listed in ascending order from 
the least severe to the most extreme: (Revised 06-04-04)  (A 1.2.7) 

•  Officer/employee presence:  uniform, badge, patrol car, physical bearing; (Revised 06-04-

04)    

•  Verbal direction:  verbal communication, negotiation skills; (Revised 06-04-04)    
•  Passive  guidance/control:    hands-on  escorting,  picking  up  body  weight,  pushing-

pulling gently; (Effective 06-01-93) 

•  Oleoresin-Capsicum spray; (Effective 06-01-93) 
•  Electronic Control Device; (Added 06-04-04) (Revised 01-27-10) 
•  Empty  hand  control:    soft  (fingertip  pressure  applied  to  pressure  points)  or  hard 

(striking motorpoints with hands/feet);  (Re-numbered and Revised 06-01-93) 

•  Intermediate  weapons  (Officer  only):    soft  (wrist  locks  using  impact  weapon)  or 

hard (striking motorpoints with impact weapon); (Revised 06-04-04)    

•  Vascular Neck Restraint and, (Revised 06-04-04)    
•  Approved firearm and ammunition (Officer only).  (Revised 06-04-04)    

 
C.  Defensive  Tactics  Annual  Qualification.    Each  commissioned  officer,  including  reserve 
officers,  must  qualify  annually  in  the  department-approved  defensive  tactics  program.  
Detention  Officers  and  other  employees  authorized  in  401.03A.3.  to  use  force  in  self-
defense will be given annual defensive tactics training relating to the level of force they are 
authorized  to  use.    Failure  to  demonstrate  qualification  standards  in  practical  and  written 
examinations will result in scheduling of remedial training with a certified defensive tactics 
instructor, after which a retest will be given.  Failure of the retest may subject an employee 
or  officer  to  termination  of  employment,  a  reserve  officer  to  disqualification  from  the 
reserve  program,  and  a  volunteer  to  disqualification  from  serving  in  the  volunteer 
assignment.  (Revised 06-04-04)    

D.  Patrol  Rifles  (Carbines).    (Added  10-19-06)  The  Arlington  Police  Department  authorizes  the 
field deployment of patrol rifles.  Patrol rifles must be zeroed to an individual, officers may 
only carry the weapon with which they have qualified, and the weapon may not be deployed 
by another unless exigent circumstances exist.  

1.  When  not  being  carried  on  duty,  department-issued  patrol  rifles  will  be  secured  and 
stored  in  the  designated  storage  area  at  the  officers  patrol  station.    Patrol  rifles  will  be 
stored with the (1) selector set to safe (2) bolt forward on an empty chamber (3)magazine 
removed (4) dust cover closed. 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

2.  Officers  transporting  authorized  personally-owned  patrol  rifles  to  and  from  work  will 
store the weapon in a protective case in the trunk or the most secure area on their vehicle.   

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

2 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

NON-DEADLY FORCE 
(A 1.2.2) 

 
401.03 
 
 
A.  Authorization.  Non-deadly force may be used 
 

action to:  (Revised 12-31-87) 

 

1.  when a police officer reasonably believes it is immediately necessary to take physical 

a.  preserve  the  peace,  prevent  commission  of  offenses,  or  prevent  suicide  or  serious 

b.  make  lawful  arrest  and/or  search,  overcome  resistance  to  same,  and/or  prevent 

c.  defend  the  officer  or  another  person  against  unlawful  violence  to  person  or 

d.  prevent  or  interrupt  an  intrusion  on  or  interference  with  lawful  possession  of 

bodily injury; 

escape from custody; 

property; or 

property. 

2.  when a police officer or detention officer reasonably believes it is necessary to maintain 
the security of the Jail or the safety or security of other persons in the Jail; or  (Revised 11-
15-99)3. 
when  a  PSA,  Fleet  Specialist,  Victim  Services  employee  or  volunteer, 
Crime  Scene  technician,  or  Detention  Officer  reasonably  believes  it  is  necessary  to 
defend  themselves  against  unlawful  violence  directed  against  them  while  they  are  in 
performance of their duty. (Effective 11-15-99) 

 
B.  Instruments 
 

1.  Oleoresin-Capsicum  (OC)  Device.    Personnel  certified  through  annual  department-
approved training and authorized to use non-deadly force in A. above are permitted to 
use oleoresin-capsicum (OC) spray issued to them by the department as follows:  (Revised 
11-15-99)  (A 1.2.2; 1.3.4; 1.3.10; 1.3.11) 

a.  Officers  may  use  OC  to  stop  or  subdue  an  animal  that  is  aggressive  toward  any 

person. 

b.  Officers  should  use  OC  against  persons  when  an  arrest  must  be  made  and  the 
suspect has failed to comply with lesser methods of force and its use will avoid use 
of a more severe method of force. 

c.  Detention Officers should use OC against a person when an inmate presents a threat 
to the safety of Jail personnel or other inmates and that inmate has failed to comply 
with lesser methods of force and its use will avoid use of a more severe method of 
force. 

d.  Mere  passive  resistance  (refusal  to  comply  with  verbal  commands,  going  limp, 
stiffening  of  limbs  without  struggling  or  verbal  arguments  against  being  arrested) 
does not justify use of OC.  (Effective 11-01-97) 

e.  Those authorized to use OC spray will carry the spray issued to them while on duty.  
Officers  shall  also  carry  their  issued  spray  on  approved  off-duty  jobs.    On-duty 
plainclothes  commissioned  personnel  are  exempt  from  this  regulation  while  acting 
in a covert capacity.  (Effective 10-04-93) 

 

1.  Electronic  Control  Devices  (ECW).  (Revised  12-18-06)  (Revised  01-27-10)  Personnel  certified 
through annual department-approved training, and authorized to use less-lethal force in 
A. above are permitted to use an approved ECW, issued by the department as follows 
(Added 06-04-04): 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

 
 

 

a.  Deployment  philosophy.    The  decision  to  use  the  ECW  is  dependant  on  the 
resistive  actions  of  the  suspect.    Factors  such  as  the  critical  distance  between  the 
officer  and  the  threat  may  justify  use  of  the  ECW.    The  ECW  is  deployed  as  an 
additional  police  tool  and  is  not  intended  to  replace  firearms,  OC,  or  defensive 
tactics techniques.  The ECW may be used to control dangerous or violent suspects 
when deadly force does not appear to be justified and/or necessary, or attempts to 
subdue  the  suspect  by  other  means  have  been  ineffective;  or  there  is  reasonable 
expectation that it will be too unsafe for officers to approach within contact range 
of  the  suspect.    All  uses  of  the  ECW  will  be  in  accordance  with  General  Order 
401.03. 

 

1)  Only a department issued ECW approved by the Chief of Police will be used by 
  No  changes,  alterations,  modifications,  or 

Arlington  Police  officers. 
substitutions will be made. 

2)  The ECW shall only be issued to and used by personnel who have successfully 
completed the department’s training, and certification program.  The Assistant 
Chief,  Field  Operations  will  assign  and  authorize  certain  officers  to  use  the 
ECW.    Use  of  the  ECW  is  prohibited  to  anyone  who  has  not  been  trained, 
certified and given the authority to use the ECW. (Revised 12-18-06) 

3)  Only properly functioning and charged ECWs will be used. 
4)  With  the  exception  of  equipment  tests  and  documented  training,  each 
discharge, 
including  negligent  discharges,  shall  be  documented  and 
investigated  according  to  General  Order  401.05,  Reporting  and  Reviewing 
Uses  of  Force.    In  addition,  a  supervisor  will  be  notified  and  will  respond  to 
each incident involving ECW usage, including negligent discharges.  All sworn 
supervisors  are  required  to  attend  a  department  certified  two  hour  ECW 
familiarization course. (Revised 12-18-06)  

5)  Any  incident  involving  negligent  discharge  of  the  ECW,  will  result  in  the 
officer  being  removed  as  a  department-approved
ECW  operator  pending 
evaluation of the incident by the user’s chain of command. (Revised 12-18-06) (Revised 
01-27-10) 

6)  Officers  shall  not  draw  or  exhibit  an  ECW  unless  circumstances  create 
reasonable cause to believe its use would be permitted under law or department 
regulations. ECW equipment tests shall be conducted in a safe and reasonable 
manner and not performed in the presence of the general public. (Added 12-01-10)
 

 

b.  Examples of appropriate ECW use (Revised 12-18-06) (Revised 01-27-10): 

  

1)  When  an  officer  has  clearly  articulated  his  or  her  authority  and  intention  to 
arrest, and the suspect by words or actions indicates to the officer that he or she 
will physically resist arrest and the officer believes that a lesser form of force 
would be ineffective or expose the officer to unnecessary danger. 

2)  Situations in which the suspect is actively resisting and will not follow verbal 
direction from officers, and the use of the ECW may prevent the situation from 
escalating  to  a  point  requiring  the  use  of  higher  levels  of  force,  including 
deadly force. 

3)  Situations  involving  threats  to  officer  safety,  and  threats  to  others,  including 

threats by a suspect to injure himself. 

 

 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

2 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

4)  Aggressive animals.  When other, conventional means are unavailable or have 

been exhausted, or are unreasonable. 

  Medical  Evaluation.

 

c.

evaluated by appropriate medical personnel including:

    After  use  of  the  ECW,  the  subject  shall  be  treated  and  

•  Doctor; 
•  Nurse; 
•  Ambulance attendant/Paramedic; 
•  Fire Department/EMT at the scene; or  
•  Minor  care  facility  or  hospital  as  may  be  appropriate  under  the 

circumstances.   

After application, probes shall only be removed by medical personnel. The subject 
shall  be  observed  for  at  least  two  hours  beginning  at  the  time  of  the  ECW 
application.        Once  the  subject  is  cleared  by  medical  personnel,  the  officer  shall 
coordinate  with  departmental  personnel,  including  jail  staff,  to  ensure  continuous 
monitoring during this two hour period.  (Moved from 401.04.E and Revised 01-27-10) 

 

3.  Impact  Weapon.    An  officer  may  use  the  impact  weapon  the  officer  has  been 
qualified to use to subdue a violently resisting subject or in self-defense or defense of a 
third  party  only  if  lesser  methods  have  failed  or  if  circumstances  warrant  the 
immediate use of the weapon.  Impact weapon strikes to the head, neck, throat, and 
clavicle will not be used unless Deadly Force is justified.  (Re-numbered 06-01-93)  (A 1.3.4) 

 
C.  Medical Aid.  After any use of non-deadly force, the person using the force shall summon 
emergency medical aid, if necessary.  Employees should be aware that injuries may not be 
readily  apparent  and  that  inquiry  into  the  person’s  physical  status  and  observation  are 
advisable.  Procedures for handling injured or possibly injured arrestees are detailed in the 
General Order on Jail/Prisoners.  (Effective 11-01-97)  (A 1. 3.5) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

DEADLY FORCE 

 
401.04 
 
A.  Authorization.  Police personnel may only use deadly force when they reasonably believe it 
is  necessary  to  protect  themselves  or  another  person  from  immediate  danger  of  death  or 
serious  bodily  injury.    Deadly  force  is  only  authorized  in  making  an  apprehension, 
preventing immediate escape of an arrestee, or against a fleeing felon or other offender when 
the officer reasonably believes that the suspect poses an immediate threat of death or serious 
bodily injury to the officer or others.  (Revised 06-04-04)   (A 1.3.2) 

1. 

Justification  for  use  of  deadly  force  is  limited  to  the  facts  reasonably  apparent  to  the 
officer at the time the officer decides to use the force.  (Effective 06-01-93) 

2.  Police personnel will not place themselves in a position of exposure to immediate threat 
of death or serious bodily  injury when there are  reasonable alternative actions.  These 
include:  (Revised 06-04-04)    

 

a.  available back-up officers subject to and consistent with the threat; 
b. 
c. 
d.  pre-planning response activity. 

suitable cover; 
securing the status quo pending additional resources and/or information; and 

3.  When police personnel should reasonably perceive that the potential exists that deadly 
force  may  be  an  outcome  of  any  situation,  the  employee  must  plan  ahead  and  use 
reasonable  alternatives  if  time  and  opportunities  permit.    "Reasonable  alternatives"  is 
defined as an action that may be taken by police personnel that may allow the employee 
to avoid the use of deadly force.  The reasonableness of the action is based on the time 
available,  the  opportunity  of  performing  the  action,  and  the  facts  apparent  to  the 
employee before and during the incident.  This includes the presence of innocent third 
persons.  Planned and supervised hazardous entry situations are recognized as meeting 
the requirement of reasonable alternatives.   (Revised 06-04-04)   (A 1.2.7) 

 
B.  Limitations.  The authority to use deadly force is limited as follows:  (Revised 06-01-93) 
 

1.  Deadly  force  will  not  be  used  against  animals  unless  necessary  for  immediate  self-
defense or to prevent immediate substantial harm to the officer or another. (Re-numbered and 
Revised 06-01-93) 

2.  An officer will not fire warning shots.  (Re-numbered 06-01-93) (A 1.3.3) 
3.  Officers  will  not  discharge  a  firearm  at  or  from  a  moving  vehicle  except  when  the 
suspect  is  using  deadly  force  against  the  officer  or  others  by  means  other  than  the 
vehicle  or  when  all  other  reasonable  means  of  defense  have  failed.    Officers  will  not 
place themselves in a position in front of an oncoming vehicle where deadly force is a 
likely outcome.  (Re-numbered 06-01-93) 

4.  Officers will not discharge a firearm recklessly.  (Effective 11-01-97) 

 
C.  Drawing  Firearms.    Except  for  general  maintenance,  storage,  or  authorized  training, 
officers will  not  draw or exhibit  a firearm  unless circumstances create reasonable cause to 
believe its use  would  be permitted under law and department regulations.  (Revised  12-31-87)    (A 
1.2.7) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

 
D.  Vascular  Neck  Restraint.    Police  Personnel  who  have  been  certified  in  its  use  may  use 
either the  Lateral or Unilateral Vascular  Neck Restraint when confronted with a violent or 
destructive individual who should be arrested or restrained (if already in custody) and there 
are no other reasonable or practical forms of control and the officer is in reasonable fear of 
death or serious bodily injury.  After use of the hold, the subject will be observed by medical 
personnel.    This  includes  observation  by  a  doctor,  nurse,  ambulance  attendant,  or  Fire 
Department EMT at the scene or at a minor care facility or hospital as may be appropriate 
under the circumstances.  (Revised 06-04-04)   (A 1.3.5) 

 
E.  Dangerous and Aggressive Animals (Added 07-05-13) (Revised 04-30-14) 

1.  In circumstances where  officers encounter any  animal which reasonably  appears,  under 
the  circumstances,  to  pose  an  imminent  threat  of  bodily  injury  to  officers  or  others, 
officers are authorized to use reasonable force to stop the threat.  This includes up to and 
including  deadly  force.    Deadly  force  is  authorized  when  it  complies  with  G.O.  401.04 
A., Authorization of Deadly Force.   

2.  In  circumstances  in  which  officers  have  sufficient  advanced  notice  that  a  potentially 
aggressive  animal  may  be  encountered,  (e.g.,  serving  of  a  search  warrant;  or  when 
included  in  the  call  text  while  enroute  to  a  call  for  service)  officers  should  develop 
reasonable contingency plans for dealing with the animal without the use of deadly force 
(e.g.,  fire  extinguisher,  ECW,  oleoresin  capsicum  (OC)  spray,  assistance  of  animal 
control).  Nothing in this policy shall prohibit any officer from using deadly force to stop 
an aggressive animal if the contingency plan has failed and deadly force is authorized as 
prescribed in training and described in G.O. 401.04 A., Authorization of Deadly Force.   
3.  In  the  event  force  is  used  against  an  animal  by  an  officer  and  the  animal  is  injured  or 
there  is  a  reasonable  belief  the  animal  is  injured,  regardless  of  whether  visible  injury 
exists, officers shall make a reasonable attempt to ensure the animal receives care for its 
injuries.  This may include but is not limited to: 

• contacting the owner to arrange private treatment in an appropriate time frame; 
• contacting Animal Services for collection and treatment; 

4.  Whenever an officer involved shooting takes place, a crime scene shall be established to 
manage the collection of the evidence.  Generally, the preservation of an animal shooting 
crime scene shall not supersede the welfare of an injured animal.  When reasonable under 
the totality of the circumstances, the owner or caretaker of the animal or Animal Services 
should have sufficient access to the crime scene to either treat or transport the animal.   

F.  Immediate Report to Supervisor.  An employee will immediately report the use of deadly 

force to a supervisor.  (Revised 06-04-04)   (Renumbered 01-27-10) (Renumbered 07-05-13) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

2 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

REPORTING AND REVIEWING USES OF FORCE 

 
401.05 
 
A.  When  Written  Report  Required.    Unless  injury  prevents  it,  before  the  end  of  the 
employee's shift, a Use of Force report will be submitted when an employee:   (Re-numbered and 
Revised 06-01-93) 

1. 

takes an action that results in or is alleged to have resulted in injury or death of another 
person;  (A 1.3.6b.) 

2.  applies force through the use of:  (Revised 06-01-93) 

•  empty hand control;  (A 1.3.6d.) 
•  drawing a firearm in response to the presence of any subject unless the officer is 
acting in accordance  with general maintenance, storage, or authorized training; 
(Added 06-18-03) (A 1.3.6d.) 

•  pointing a firearm at any subject;  (A 1.3.6d.) 
•  handcuffing a person who is released without arrest;  (A 1.3.6d.) 
•  chemical irritant (oleoresin-capsicum spray, CS or CN gas);  (A 1.3. 6c.) 
•  TASER and/or the accidental discharge of a TASER; (A 1.3.6c.) (Added 06-04-04) (Revised 

12-18-06) 
impact weapon;  (A 1.3.6c.) 

• 
•  Vascular Neck Restraint;  (A 1. 3.6c.) 
•  discharge  of  firearm  on  or  off-duty  (training  and  recreation  are  exempted);  

(Revised 11-01-97)  (A 1.3.6a.) 

•  diversionary device;  (A 1.3.6d.) 
•  apprehension by dog.  (A 1.3.6d.) 

 
B.  Calls Involving More than One Officer/Detention Officer.  A Use of Force Report form 
can  document  uses  of  force  by  up  to  3  officers  or  detention  officers  or  against  up  to  3 
subjects. 
  Involvement  of  more  employees  or  subjects  requires  additional  forms.  
Completion  of  the  form  on  any  dispatched  call  is  the  responsibility  of  the  primary 
dispatched officer.  In any other event, the first officer/detention officers who uses force is 
responsible  for  completing  the  form.    Each  employee  is  responsible  for  assuring  that  their 
use  of  force  has  been  correctly  documented  on  a  form.    Each  should  complete  their  own 
narrative  supplement  to  any  arrest  or  offense  report  or  an  incident  report  to  describe  their 
actions.  (Revised 11-01-97) 

 
C.  Routing  and  Review.    The  Use  of  Force  Report  and  any  related  reports  will  be  routed 
through the chain of command to the Division Commander.  If it is determined during the 
chain of command review that improper procedure or error occurred, appropriate action will 
be  initiated.    After  the  review,  the  Division  Commander  will  forward  the  Report  and  any 
related reports to the Training Section.   The Training Commander will conduct an annual 
analysis of Use of Force Reports.  (Revised 11-15-99)  (A 1.3.7; 1.3.13) 

 
D.  Reporting Exception.  Personnel assigned to a tactical operation who participated in both a 
pre-operation briefing and a post-operation debriefing or evaluation and whose actions were 
reviewed  according  to  the  procedures  of  the  Special  Operations  Standard  Operating 
Procedure are exempt from completing the Use of Force Report form.  (Effective 10-04-93) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

INVESTIGATING USES OF FORCE 

 
401.06 
 
A.  No Firearms and No Serious Injury.  If firearms were not involved and injuries sustained 
were  not  serious,  the  use  of  force  will  be  reported  and  reviewed  through  the  chain  of 
command as specified in 401.05C. above. (Revised 06-01-93) 

 
B.  Firearms or Serious Bodily Injury or Death.  The following procedures will be followed 
after  every  incident  of  firearms  discharge  (other  than  training  or  recreation)  by  an  officer 
and after every use of force that results or is likely to result in serious bodily injury or death. 
(Revised 03-30-92) 

1.  Involved Employee Immediate activities.  The involved employee will:  (Revised 12-31-87) 

a.  determine  the  physical  condition  of  any  injured  person,  render  first  aid  when 
appropriate,  notify  Dispatch  Services  of  the  incident  and  location  and  request 
necessary emergency medical aid;  (Revised 11-01-97) 

b.  unless removed from the scene for medical treatment, remain at the scene until the 
on-duty  shift  commander  arrives.    If  involved  officer’s  presence  might  cause  a 
more  hazardous  situation  to  develop  (violent  crowd,  for  example)  the  ranking 
officer  at  the  scene  may  instruct  the  officer  to  respond  to  a  more  appropriate 
location before the shift commander arrives;  (Revised 11-01-97) 
if applicable, protect any weapon used for examination.  (Revised 11-01-97) 

c. 

2.  Dispatch  Services  will  send  requested  medical  aid  and  notify  the  shift  commander.  

(Revised 11-01-97) 

 
3.  Preliminary Field Investigation 

a.  The supervisor will secure the scene and conduct a preliminary field investigation.  
The  supervisor  will  relay  the  employee’s  request  for  a  private  attorney  and/or  a 
Critical Incident Stress Management Team Group member, but the employee must 
relate  sufficient  details  of  the  incident,  as  the  employee  believes  them  to  be,  to 
allow  the  preliminary  investigation  to  be  conducted  and  a  determination  made  of 
whether or not Internal Affairs, criminal investigations, or others are to be called to 
the  scene  without  waiting  for  arrival  of  an  attorney  or  Critical  Incident  Stress 
Management Team member.  (Revised 11-01-97) 

b.  Dispatch  Services  will  notify  investigative  and  administrative  personnel  and,  if 
applicable,  an  attorney  specified  by  the  employee  and/or  on-call  Critical  Incident 
Stress Management Team member, as directed by the supervisor.   (Revised 06-04-04)    

4. 

Involved  employees will  prepare written  reports  of the incident in a timely manner  as 
directed by supervisors.  (Revised 06-04-04)    

 
5.  Administrative  and  Criminal  Investigations  in  Cases  of  Serious  Bodily  Injury  or 
Death.    In  cases  of  serious  bodily  injury  or  death  or  the  likelihood  of  same, 
administrative and criminal investigations will be conducted, as follows: 

a. 

Investigative personnel will be called to the scene. 

1)  Administrative Investigation.  Internal investigators will be shown the scene 

and advised of the results of the preliminary investigation. 

 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

2)  Criminal Investigation.  Traffic Section (in the case of a motor Vehicle Crash 
or pursuit involving a police employee acting in the scope of employment) or 
Crimes  Against  Persons  investigators  (in  the  case  of  a    shooting  or  other 
exercise  of  official  authority  by  a  police  employee)  will  conduct  a  thorough 
field  investigation,  collecting  all  evidence  and  interviewing  all  witnesses  as 
would be done in any case that did not involve a police employee.  In the case 
of a shooting, this shall include examining the weapon(s) (including secondary 
weapons and any weapons in police vehicles) of all officers present at the time 
any shots were fired, seizing weapon(s) that may have been fired; and seizing 
samples of spent ammunition.   In addition, investigators shall secure tapes of 
all police radio traffic and print-outs of all MDC/MDT transactions relating to 
the incident.  (Revised 11-01-97) 

b.  Before  interviewing  or  obtaining  written  statements  of  the  involved  employee(s),  
internal  investigators  will  advise  employees  of  their  rights  in  an  internal 
investigation (as specified in the General Order on Internal Affairs).  (Revised 06-04-04) 
(Miranda section deleted 07-02-12)    

c.  A criminal investigation takes priority over an administrative one.  (Effective 12-31-87) 
d.  All  applicable  police  reports  will  be  forwarded  to  Internal  Affairs  before  other 
police  sections.    The  digital  recording  system  will  not  be  used  in  deadly  force 
investigations.  These reports will be retained by Internal Affairs until released by 
the  Legal  Advisor,  except  that  appropriate  investigative  section  personnel  will 
retain  all  original  documents  generated  by  that  section  during  the  investigation.  
(Revised 03-30-92) 

e. 

The administrative and criminal investigations will be under the direction of the 
City Attorney's office and deemed confidential attorney work product, not to be 
disclosed except by express waiver or court order.  (Effective 12-31-87) 

6.  Deadly  Force  Review  Board  (DFRB).    Completed  administrative  and  criminal 
investigations  in  cases  of  serious  bodily  injury  or  death  of  a  person  by  uses  of  force 
other than a vehicle will be reviewed by a Deadly Force Review Board appointed by the 
Police  Chief.    The  Police  Chief  may  but  is  not  required  to  appoint  a  DFRB  in  cases 
involving motor vehicle operation by an officer.  (Revised 11-01-97) 

a.  Each  Board  will  have  two  Lieutenants,  a  Sergeant,  and  two  patrol-grade  officers.  
Police  personnel  in  the  chain  of  command  of  the  involved  employee(s),  those 
involved in the incident or the investigation, and those who were at the scene of the 
incident  for  any  reason  are  ineligible  to  serve  on  the  DFRB.    The  Police  Legal 
Advisor and Training Commander will be ex officio members of the Board.  The  
employee may select one member of the Board subject to the membership criteria 
stated in this provision.   (Revised 06-04-04)    

b.  The  Board  will  elect  a  presiding  officer  from  among  their  members.    The 
Chairperson presides at all meetings of the Board and votes only in case of a tie. 
c.  The  Board  will  review  reports  and  facts  submitted  by  Internal  Affairs  and,  if 
applicable, the appropriate other investigative section.  The Board will not hear any 
direct  testimony  from  involved  personnel  or  witnesses.    If  additional  information 
on the facts of the incident is needed, the Board will ask the investigative segment 
to  conduct  supplemental  interviews.    The  Board  will  submit  a  written  report 
indicating  its  concurrence  or  non-concurrence  with  the  investigative  segments 
report(s).  The report will state specifically the reasons for the Board's conclusions.  
The  DFRB  report  on  an  Internal  Affairs  investigation  will  be  sent  to  the 
commander of the employee's Division.  The DFRB report on a criminal or traffic 
investigation will be sent to the Police Chief.  (Revised 11-01-97) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

2 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

d.  The  Board  will  make  a  report  to  the  Police  Chief,  evaluating  the  quality  of 
supervision  prior  to,  during,  and  after  the  incident  and  the  quality  of  the  post-
shooting investigative process(es), and recommend establishment or revision of any 
training,  policy,  or  procedure  determined  during  its  review  to  be  necessary. 
(Renumbered 03-30-92) 

 

7.  Civil  Rights  Investigations.    The  department  will  not  order  or  request  any  of  its 
members who may be suspects to confer with federal investigators without the advice of 
counsel.  (See General Order 206.02).  (Effective 12-31-87) 

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

3 

 

 

 

General Orders                                                                                             

 
401.00 USE OF FORCE 

DEALING WITH THE AFTEREFFECTS OF USES OF FORCE 

 
401.07 
 
A.  Mandatory  Administrative  Leave.    When  an  employee’s  exercise  of  police  authority 
results or is likely to result in serious bodily injury or death, the employee will be placed on 
administrative  leave  with  pay  for  the  rest  of  that  tour  of  duty  and  the  next  regularly 
scheduled tour of duty.  (Revised 06-04-04)  (A 01.03.08) 

1.  As quickly as possible and no later than five days after the incident, the employee will 
be sent to  a  department-furnished psychologist.    The  purpose  of the  consultation is to 
allow  the  employee  to  express  feelings  and  to  deal  with  the  moral,  ethical,  and/or 
psychological aftereffects of the incident.  It also allows the psychologist to have input 
into the assessment of the employee’s fitness to return to duty.  (Revised 06-04-04)    

2.  The  consultation  with  the  psychologist  will  not  be  related  to  any  department 
investigation of the incident.  Nothing discussed in the consultation, except as it relates 
to the employee’s fitness for duty, will be reported to the department.  The consultation 
session  will  remain  protected  by  the  privileged  Professional  Psychologist  Code  of 
Ethics. (Revised 06-04-04)    

3.  The  mandatory  administrative  leave  may  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  deemed 
appropriate by the Deputy Chief of the involved employee's Division or, in the Deputy 
Chief’s absence, another Deputy Chief designated by the Police Chief, with the input of 
the employee and psychologist. (Revised 06-04-04)    

4.  When use of force has resulted in death, no employee will be returned to regular duty 
until an administrative review by the Deputy Chief of the employee’s Division or, in the 
Deputy Chief’s absence, another Deputy Chief designated by the Police Chief, has been 
completed  and forwarded to the Police  Chief  for  inclusion  in the  Internal  Affairs file.  
(Revised 06-04-04)    

a.  The purpose of this review is to determine if it would be in the best interest of the 
department  to  return  the  employee  to  regular  duty  or  to  reassign  the  employee  to 
other duties pending completion of the full investigation into the incident. (Revised 06-
04-04)   

b.  The  review  must  be  in  writing  and  indicate  the  specific  findings  and  reasons  for 
returning the employee to regular duty or reassigning the employee.  (Effective 04-03-89) 
In the case of reassignment, the written report will include either a proposed date of 
return or a specific date by which the incident will again be reviewed for return to 
duty determination.  (Revised 06-04-04)    

c. 

 
B.  Discretionary Administrative Leave.  An immediate supervisor has discretion to place an 
employee on administrative leave with pay for the employee’s next shift for exercise of use 
of force that results in less than serious bodily injury.  (Revised 06-04-04)    

C.  Counseling.    In  addition  to  psychological  consultation,  the  employee  and  members  of  the 
employee’s  immediate  family  may  obtain  assistance  of  the  Critical  Incident  Management 
Team and/or the department chaplain in dealing with the moral and ethical aftereffects of the 
incident.  (Revised 06-04-04)    

D.  An  employee  on  administrative  leave  must  remain  available  at  all  times  for  official 
department  interviews  and  statements  regarding  the  incident.    While  on  leave  and  after 
return  to  duty,  the  employee  will  not  discuss  the  incident  with  anyone  except  assigned 
investigators,  private  attorney,  psychologist,  chosen  clergy,  spouse,  or  Critical  Incident 
Management  Team  assigned  member.  (Employee’s  should  note  that  immediate  family 
members other than the spouse and members of the Critical Incident Management Team are 
not subject to the confidential communications privilege.)  (Revised 06-04-04)    

Arlington, Texas Police Department 

 

1 

 

 

 

