   Policy 1115 

Subject 

 
Date Published 
 

USE OF FORCE 

24 November 2019 

Page 
 

1 of 11 

 

 
3. 
 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6 .  

 
7.  

 
8. 

 

By Order of the Police Commissioner 

 
POLICY 
 
The purpose of this policy is to establish when a member may use force, and members’ duties before, 
during,  and after  the  Use  of  Force. The  decision  to use force  requires  careful  attention  and continual 
assessment  of  the  situation,  threats,  options,  and  risks,  with  the  goal  of  resolving  the  encounter 
peacefully. 
 
While members must at all times comply with the minimum legal requirements governing the Use 
of Force, they must also comply with even stricter standards set forth by Department policy.   
 
 
CORE PRINCIPLES 
 
1. 
 
2. 

Value and Worth of All Persons.  All human beings have equal value and worth and members 
shall respect and uphold the value and dignity of all persons at all times. 

Sanctity of Human Life. Members shall make every effort to preserve human life in all situations.  

Peaceful Resolutions.  Members shall avoid the Use of Force unless it is not possible to do so. 

De-Escalation.  Members shall use De-Escalation Techniques and tactics to reduce any threat or 
gain compliance to  lawful commands  without  the Use of Force or  with the  lowest  level of force 
possible (See Policy 1107, De-Escalation).  

Avoiding Escalation.  Members shall not do or say anything that escalates an encounter unless 
necessary to achieve a lawful purpose. 

Assessment.  Members  shall  continuously  assess  each  situation  and  change  the  member’s 
response as the circumstances change.  Members may  be justified in using force in one instance, 
but  not  justified  in  using  force  an  instant  later.  This  duty  to  assess  includes  the  continuous 
assessment of circumstances before and after the member uses force.  

Use  of  Force:  Reasonable,  Necessary,  and  Proportional.  Members shall use only the force 
Reasonable, Necessary, and Proportional to respond to the threat or resistance to effectively and 
safely resolve an incident, and will immediately reduce the level of force as the threat or resistance 
diminishes.  

Reporting  Use  of  Force.    Each  member  who  uses  force,  or  observes  another  member  or 
members use force, shall immediately notify their supervisor, and will accurately and completely 
report the Use of Force by the end of their tour of duty (See Policy 725, Use of Force Reporting, 
Review, and Assessment). 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 2 of 11 

 

9. 

 
10. 

 
11. 
 
12. 

Duty  to  Intervene.  Members  shall  intervene  to  prevent  the  abusive  conduct  or  the  use  of 
excessive force by  another member (See Policy 319, Duty to Intervene).  

Duty  to  Provide  Medical  Assistance.  After  any  Use  of  Force  incident,  members  shall 
immediately render aid to any injured person consistent with the member’s training and request 
medical  assistance.  If  restrained,  persons  are  not  to  be  positioned  facedown  as  it  may  cause 
positional  asphyxia,  and  placing  restrained  persons  on  their  back  may  lead  to  radial  nerve 
damage to the wrists and forearms. Restrained persons are to be placed in a seated position or 
on their sides. 

Accountability.  Members shall be held accountable for uses of force that violate law or policy. 

Retaliatory Force.  Members are prohibited from using force against persons engaged in First 
Amendment protected activities or to punish persons for fleeing, resisting arrest or assaulting a 
member, or for any other reason (See Policy 804, First Amendment Protected Activity). 

 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Active  Aggression — Active Aggression is when a person attacks or attempts to attack a member or 
another person. Strikes, kicks, or attempted strikes or kicks with hands, fists, the head, elbows, knees, 
or an instrument, constitute Active Aggression.  
 
Aggravated  Aggression  —  Aggravated Aggression is when a person presents an Imminent Threat of 
death  or  Serious  Physical  Injury  to  the  member  or  another  person  based  on  the  Totality  of  the 
Circumstances.  Aggravated Aggression represents the  least  encountered  but  most  serious  threat  to  a 
member or other person.  Even when confronted with Aggravated Aggression, the member is required to 
make every reasonable effort to de-escalate and to continuously assess the member’s Use of Force.    
 
Chemical  Agents  —  Substances  designed  to  irritate  the  eyes  and  mucous  membranes  (CS  gas, 
PepperBall, Mk-9 Pepper Fogger, smoke, etc.).   
 
Chokehold/Neck Hold  — A Chokehold or Neck hold is any hold or contact with the neck that may inhibit 
breathing by compression of the airway in the neck, may inhibit blood flow by compression of the blood 
vessels in the neck, or that applies pressure to the front, side, or back of the neck. Chokeholds/Neck Holds 
are prohibited unless the use of Deadly Force/Lethal Force is justified.  
 
Conducted Electrical Weapon (CEW) — A weapon designed to discharge electrical impulses in two 
modes:  
 

Drive Stun — Pulling the trigger on the CEW with the cartridge removed or discharged, and 
placing the electrodes upon the skin/clothing of the person. Drive Stunning does not cause 
neuro-muscular incapacitation but causes severe pain.   
 
Probes Deployment — Probes Deployment is the primary way that CEWs are used. With a 
cartridge attached, pulling the trigger fires two probes with barbs on the end that can penetrate 
the clothing or skin of a person. The two probes are connected to the CEW by wires and upon 
contact, if an electrical circuit is established, the CEW delivers pulsed electricity into the person, 
and overrides the person’s voluntary motor function. Probes Deployment also causes significant 
pain.   
 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 3 of 11 

 

Deadly Force/Lethal Force — Any force likely to cause death or Serious Physical Injury, whether the 
member intended to cause death or Serious Physical Injury or not. Deadly Force/Lethal Force includes, 
but is not limited to: 

  The discharge of a firearm at a person; 
  Strikes with any hard object such as a baton, flashlight, radio, weapon stock/handle, or Improvised 

 

Impact Weapon to the head, neck, sternum, spine, groin, or kidneys;  
Intentionally striking a person’s head against a hard, fixed object such as a roadway, concrete 
floor, wall, or iron bars; 

“Knee drops” against a prone or supine person’s head, neck, or torso;  

  Knee strikes or kicks to a person’s head; 
  Any strikes to a person’s throat;  
 
  Chokeholds/Neck Holds; 
  Shooting someone in the head, neck, chest, or back, with a Less-Lethal Launcher at close range. 
  The use of any force on a person whose health, age, condition, or circumstances make it likely 

death or Serious Physical Injury will result.  
 

De-Escalation  Techniques  —  De-Escalation  Techniques  are  actions  taken  by  members  that  are 
designed  to  eliminate  the  need  to  use  force  in  order  to  resolve  any  event  or  situation.  De-Escalation 
Techniques  include:  talking  to  a  person  using  a  tone  of  voice  and  language  that  is  not  aggressive  or 
confrontational;  creating  space  or  placing  barriers  between  the  member  and  the  person;  waiting  the 
person out when circumstances permit; permitting a person to move about when safe; permitting a person 
the opportunity to make statements or ask questions; slowing down the pace of an incident; tactical re-
positioning and requesting additional resources. The guiding principles for de-escalation are patience, 
flexibility, and the desire to resolve each situation peacefully (See Policy 1107, De-Escalation).   
 
Imminent Threat — A person presents an Imminent Threat when the person has the means and ability 
to  harm  the  member  or  another  person,  and  the  member  reasonably  believes  the  person  intends  to 
deliver that harm.  
  
Improvised Impact Weapon (IIW) —  An Improvised Impact Weapon (IIW) is a device or object that is 
not a department approved weapon, but is nonetheless used as an impact weapon (e.g., flashlight, radio, 
or stick).  Such weapons may be unpredictable, ineffective, or exert unexpectedly high levels of damage 
(e.g., board with protruding nail).  Consequently, members shall use Improvised Impact Weapons only in 
rare,  emergency  conditions  where  members  lack  an  authorized  Baton  or  other  approved  less-lethal 
alternatives, and use of an Improvised Impact Weapon is reasonable and necessary to defend against a 
person displaying Active or Aggravated Aggression.  
 
Less-Lethal  Force  —  Force that, when employed as designed, intended, and consistent with policy 
and training, is not likely to cause death or Serious Physical Injury. Devices of Less-Lethal Force may 
include, but not be limited to, a DS-3027 bean bag, FN-303, Pepper Ball rounds, batons/impact weapons, 
O.C. spray, and CEW. The way a Less-Lethal Force device is used and the circumstances in which it is 
used could constitute Deadly Force/Lethal Force.  
 
Less-Lethal Launchers/Munitions  — A delivery tool that, when used as designed and intended, is less 
likely to cause death or Serious Physical Injury than a conventional lethal weapon such as a firearm. Less-
Lethal Launchers/Munitions are only approved for use by certified members.  
 
Physical  Force  —  A  member  uses  Physical  Force  any  time  a  member  coercively  touches,  directly  or 
indirectly,  any  person.  Physical  Force  includes  holds,  grabs,  blows,  and  strikes  as  well  as  the  use  of 
instruments, such as batons, devices, such as CEWs, tools such as O.C. spray, canines, or firearms, whether 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 4 of 11 

 

 
 

 
 

lethal or less-lethal.   
 
Reasonable, Necessary, and Proportional — The review of every Use of Force shall be to determine 
whether it was reasonable, necessary, and proportional in light of the Totality of the Circumstances that 
were known, or should have been known, to the member, and in light of the mandates of BPD Policies. 
 
 

Reasonable  —  A member uses Reasonable Force when the member uses no more force than 
required to perform a lawful purpose.  

Necessary —  Force is necessary only when no reasonably effective alternative exists. When force 
is Necessary, members shall use force in a manner that avoids unnecessary injury or risk of injury 
to members and civilians. 

Proportional  —  Proportionality  measures  whether  the force  used  by  the  member  is  rationally 
related to the level of resistance or aggression confronting the member.  

 
NOTE: Members who use force that is not Reasonable, Necessary, and Proportional will be subject to 
corrective action, possible discipline, possible criminal prosecution, and/or civil liability.  

 
Resistance — Members may face the following types of Resistance to lawful directives:  
 

Active Resistance — Active Resistance is when a person moves to avoid detention or arrest but 
does not attack or attempt to attack the member or another person. Attempts to leave the scene, 
fleeing, hiding from detection, physical resistance to being handcuffed, or pulling away from the 
member’s  grasp are all examples of Active Resistance. Verbal statements, bracing,  or tensing 
alone  do  not  constitute Active  Resistance. A person’s reaction to  pain  caused  by a member or 
purely defensive reactions to force does not constitute Active Resistance.   
 
Passive  Resistance — Passive Resistance is when a non-assaultive person fails to comply 
with the member’s commands without attempting to flee. Passive Resistance may include, but 
not be limited to, going limp, standing stationary and not moving based upon lawful direction, 
and/or verbally signaling an intention to avoid or prevent being taken into custody.    

 
Serious  Physical  Injury  —  Serious  Physical  Injury  is  when  there  is  disfigurement  or  substantial 
disruption or harm to one or more body parts, organs, or systems. The term includes, for example, brain 
injury, with or without unconsciousness, gunshot wounds, cardiac arrhythmia, difficulty breathing, cardiac 
or respiratory arrest, broken bones, dislocations, torn ligaments or tendons, or significant bleeding. This 
list is not exhaustive and is intended only to provide representative examples for guidance.  
  
Temporary Pain — Any pain or complaint of pain that is brief, does not result in injury, and is delivered 
as a means to gain compliance. Temporary Pain may result from the application of, but is not limited to, 
elbow grips, wrist grips, shoulder grips, pressure point techniques, and/or forcible takedowns.  
 
Totality  of  Circumstances  ─  The  Totality  of  Circumstances  consists  of  all  facts  and  circumstances 
surrounding any event. The facts and circumstances may include but are not limited to:  
 

  Whether an offense has occurred;  
  The nature of the offense; 
  The seriousness of the offense; 
  The size and strength of the person; 
  The number of persons;  

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 5 of 11 

 

 

 

  The availability of weapons; 
  Whether the  person  is  exhibiting  signs  of mental  illness  or  is  experiencing  a behavioral  health 

crisis; 

  Whether  a  person  suffers  from  a  medical  or  behavioral  health  disability,  physical  or  hearing 
impairment,  is  impaired  by  alcohol  or  drug  use,  or  may  be  non-compliant  due  to  a  language 
barrier;  

  Other force options;  
  Availability  of  non-force  options,  including  tactical  repositioning,  going  to  cover,  or  other  De-

Escalation Techniques;  
  Environmental factors;  
  Availability of back up and specialized units.  

 
Use of Force — Any Use of Force or show of force that falls within Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 force as 
defined in this policy. Use of Force Levels are:  
 

Level 1 Use of Force — Includes: 

     Using  techniques  that  cause  Temporary  Pain  or  disorientation  as  a  means  of  gaining 
compliance, hand control or escort techniques (e.g., elbow grip, wrist grip, or shoulder grip), 
and  pressure  point  compliance  techniques.  Force  under  this  category  is  not  reasonably 
expected to cause injury,   

  Pointing a firearm, Less-Lethal Launcher, or CEW at a person, 
 
“Displaying the arc” with a CEW as a form of warning, and 
  Forcible takedowns that do not result in actual injury or complaint of injury. 

NOTE: Escorting, touching, or handcuffing a person with minimal or no resistance does not constitute a 

Level 1 Use of Force.  

 
EXCEPTION #1:  SWAT team members and members assigned to work on a federal task force will not 
be required to report the pointing of a firearm at a person as a Use of Force during the 
execution of SWAT team or federal task force duties. 

 
EXCEPTION #2:  Pointing of a firearm at a  person by any member, if done solely  while entering and 
securing a building in connection with the execution of an arrest or search warrant, will 
not be a Use of Force. A permanent-rank supervisor must still complete a Form 93, 
Weapons-Pointing  Report  detailing  the  incident  (See  Policy  725,  Use  of  Force 
Reporting, Review, and Assessment). 

Level 2 Use of Force — Includes:  

  Force that causes or could reasonably be expected to cause an injury greater than Temporary 
Pain or the use of weapons or techniques listed below — provided they do not otherwise rise 
to a Level 3 Use of Force: 

     Discharge of a CEW in Drive-Stun or Probes Deployment, in the direction of a person, including 

where a CEW is fired at a person but misses, 
  Use of OC spray or other Chemical Agents,  
  Weaponless defense techniques including, but not limited to, elbow or closed fist strikes, open 

hand strikes, and kicks, 

  Discharge of a Less-Lethal Launcher/Munitions in the direction of a person, 
  Canine-inflicted injuries that do not rise to a Level 3 Use of Force,  
  Non-weapon strikes to the head,  neck, sternum, spine, groin, or kidney  area, and 
  Striking of a person or a vehicle with a vehicle that does not rise to Level 3 Use of Force. 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 6 of 11 

 
Level 3 Use of Force — Includes:  

  Strikes to the head, neck, sternum, spine, groin, or kidney area with an impact weapon,  
  Firearm discharges by a BPD member,   
  Applications of more than three (3) CEW cycles in a single encounter, regardless of the mode 
or duration of the application, and regardless of whether the applications are by the same or 
different members,  

  CEW  application  for  longer  than  15  seconds  whether  the  application  is  a  single  continuous 

application or from multiple applications, 

  Uses of Force resulting in death, Serious Physical Injury, loss of consciousness, or requiring 

hospitalization, and 

  Uses of Deadly Force/Lethal Force.  

 
NOTE: Hospitalization refers to admission to the hospital, and does not include treatment and release in 

the emergency department, no matter how long the stay.  

Sworn members have the authority to use Reasonable force when Necessary to accomplish lawful 
ends. This  authority  is  limited by  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Maryland, federal law,  the  United 
States  Constitution,  and  the  provisions of this policy. Members must conform their actions to the 
law, the Constitution, and BPD policies. When members use force, they shall exercise the utmost 
restraint.  When  practical,  members  should  announce  that  force  will  be  utilized  prior  to  the 
application of such force. 

Members  shall  prevent  or  stop  the  illegal,  inappropriate,  or  excessive  Use  of  Force  by  other 
members. Failure to intervene may subject a member to disciplinary action (See Policy 319, Duty 
to Intervene).  

Members may only use weapons and/or force techniques that are allowed by policy and on which 
the member is trained, unless warranted by the Totality of Circumstances.  

 
De-Escalation  
 
Members  shall,  unless  it  is  not  possible  to  do  so,  avoid  the  Use  of  Force  by  using  De-Escalation 
Techniques, including verbal persuasion and warnings, slowing down the pace of an incident, waiting out 
persons, using barriers, creating distance (and thus the reactionary gap) between the member and the 
threat, and requesting additional resources such as specialized units, CIT trained members, behavioral 
health  care  providers,  or  negotiators,  before  resorting  to  force,  and  to  reduce  the  need  for  force.  De-
Escalation  Techniques  mitigate  the  threats  and  gives  officers  time  to  utilize  extra  resources,  and 
increases time available to call more officers or specialty units (See Policy 1107, De-Escalation). 
 
1. 

Members shall talk to the  person; attempt to convince the person to comply; reduce any threat 
presented by withdrawing to a position that is tactically advantageous; or take actions that  allow 
the member greater distance and time, in order to de-escalate a situation or deploy a lesser force 
option or no force at all. 

 
 
DIRECTIVES  
 
Use of Force 
 
1. 

 

 

 
2.  

  
3. 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 7 of 11 

Members shall perform their work in a manner that avoids unduly jeopardizing their own safety or 
the  safety  of  others  through  poor  tactical  decisions  including,  but  not  limited  to,  immediately 
approaching a person without proper evaluation of the situation, failing to leave sufficient space 
between the member and the person, closing the reactionary gap, or escalating a situation. 

Members shall not use tactics that unnecessarily escalate an encounter or create a need for force. 

Members shall de-escalate force immediately as resistance decreases.  

If the member has no alternative to using force, the member shall use only the amount of  force 
that is Reasonable, Necessary and Proportional to respond to the threat or resistance and shall 
immediately reduce the level of force as the threat or resistance lessens or stops.  

Assess the situation, threats, and risks; 

 
Critical Thinking  
 
Prior to using force, members shall use a critical thinking and decision-making framework to analyze and 
respond  to  incidents.  This  framework  will  allow  members  to  uphold  the  sanctity  of  life  and  protect 
themselves  by  decelerating  and  stabilizing  a  situation  to  minimize  the  likelihood  of  a  Use  of  Force 
incident. Using this framework, members will: 
 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
Restrained Persons 
 
1. 

Identify options and determine the best course of action; and 

Consider police powers and BPD policy; 

Gather relevant facts about the incident; 

Act, review, and re-assess the situation. 

Members shall not use force against persons who are handcuffed or otherwise restrained, except 
in  exceptional  circumstances  where  the  Totality  of  Circumstances  makes  it  Reasonable  and 
Necessary to prevent injury or escape. Members are cautioned that force that may be Proportional 
against an unrestrained person may not be Proportional when used on a restrained person. As 
with any Use of Force, members shall be required to use De-Escalation Techniques and critical 
thinking in order to avoid the Use of Force. 
 
Members shall not use force against a handcuffed or restrained  person if the person’s actions 
only present a risk of property damage. 

2. 

Members shall not position a restrained person face-down as it may cause positional asphyxia, 
placing  persons  on  their  back  can  cause  radial  nerve  damage  to  the  wrist  and  forearm  area. 
Restrained persons are to be seated or placed on their side.  

 
Use of Deadly Force/Lethal Force 
 
1. 

The use of Deadly Force/Lethal Force shall always be the last resort. 
 
Members  shall  not  use  Deadly  Force/Lethal  Force  unless  they  have  exhausted  de-escalation 

 

2. 

 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 

 
3. 

2. 

 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

6.  

 

 
2. 

 
3. 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 8 of 11 

(See Policy 1107, De-Escalation) and Less-Lethal Force options have been tried and failed, or 
are not safe based on the Totality of Circumstances.  

A  member  may  use  Deadly  Force/Lethal  Force  when  they  reasonably  believe  such  action  is 
immediately necessary to protect a member or another person from an Imminent Threat of death 
or Serious Physical Injury.  

Prior to the decision to employ Deadly Force/Lethal Force members shall consider environmental 
considerations such as field of fire, backdrop, bystanders, potential for ricochet, possibility of over-
penetration, and other risks to life. 

Where safety permits, a member should identify himself/herself as a law enforcement officer and 
state  his/her  intention  to  use  Deadly  Force/Lethal  Force  before  using  a  firearm  or  employing 
Deadly Force/Lethal Force. 

A member may use Deadly Force/Lethal Force to prevent the escape of a fleeing person if force 
is authorized and no Reasonable force alternative exists that is within BPD policy, the member 
has given a verbal warning to the person (if time, safety, and circumstances permit), and there is 
probable cause to believe that: 

The person has committed or is in the process of committing a felony involving the infliction 
or threatened infliction of Serious Physical Injury or death, and 

 

6.1. 

 
6.2. 

The escape of the person would pose an Imminent Threat of death or Serious Physical 
Injury to the member or another unless the person is apprehended without delay, and 

 
6.3.  Members  have  identified  themselves  as  law  enforcement  officers,  have  stated  their 
intention  to  use  Deadly  Force/Lethal  Force,  and  have  given  the  person  a  reasonable 
opportunity to comply voluntarily, if time, safety, and the circumstances permit.  

 
Restrictions on the Use of Deadly Force/Lethal Force  
 
1. 

Deadly Force/Lethal Force  shall not be used  to  subdue  persons  whose  conduct  is  a threat  only 
to  property. 

Deadly Force/Lethal Force shall not be used against persons whose conduct is a threat only to 
themselves. 

The following are prohibited unless the use of Deadly Force/Lethal Force is authorized and no 
reasonable alternatives exist:  
 
3.1.  Discharge of a firearm at a person. 
 
3.2. 

Strikes with any hard object, such as a baton, flashlight, radio, weapon stock/handle, or 
IIW to the person’s head, neck, sternum, spine, groin, or kidneys. 

 
3.3. 

Intentional strikes of a person’s head against a hard, fixed object including, but not limited 
to, a roadway, concrete floor, wall, or iron bars. 

 
3.4.  Kneeing or kicking a person’s head, neck, back, or torso, including “knee drops” onto a 

prone or supine person. 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 9 of 11 

Intentionally deploying a CEW to the neck, chest, groin or face of a person. 

 
3.5. 
 
3.6.  Application of Chokeholds/Neck Holds. 
 
3.7.  Discharge of a Less-Lethal Launcher to the chest, neck, or head at close range. 
 
3.8. 

The use of any force on a person whose health, age, condition, or circumstances make it 
likely that death or Serious Physical Injury will result.   

 
Firing warning shots is prohibited.  
 
Firing into crowds is prohibited.  

Members shall not fire any weapon from or at a moving vehicle, except: 
 
6.1. 

To counter an immediate threat of death or Serious Physical Injury to the member or another 
person, by a person in the vehicle using means other than the vehicle. 

 
6.2. 

To  counter  a  situation  where  the  member or another person  is  unavoidably  in  the  path 
of the  vehicle  and  cannot move to safety.  Members shall not position themselves in the 
path of a  moving vehicle where they have no option but to use Deadly Force/Lethal Force. 

 
NOTE: Refer to Policy 409, Firearms Regulations, for instructions on the use of firearms. 
 
 
REQUIRED ACTION 
 
Duty to Intervene 
 
Members shall intervene to stop any member from using excessive force.  Intervention  may  be  verbal 
and/or  physical (see Policy 319, Duty to Intervene).  
 
NOTE:   Failure  to  intervene  may  subject  a  member  to  disciplinary  action.  Members  must 
immediately, or as soon as safety allows, notify a permanent-rank supervisor after such 
an intervention. 

 
Duty to Provide Medical Assistance 
 
1. 

When  there  is  a  visible  injury,  complaint  of  injury,  signs  of  medical  distress,  or  when  medical 
attention is requested by any person, members shall immediately render aid consistent with their 
training and shall request that a medic respond to the scene, or transport the person directly to 
the  nearest  hospital  emergency  room.  The  member  shall  then  notify  their  supervisor  and  the 
Communications Section.  

If  a  person  has  been  subjected  to  impact  by  any type of Less-Lethal  Force including CEW, 
impact  weapons  or  impact  projectile,  he/she  will  be  provided  with  medical  treatment.  If  the 
person  refuses  medical  treatment  or  leaves  the  location (e.g., persons of an unlawful gathering 
dispersed by Less-Lethal Force that may voluntarily leave without aid), members must document 
the actions taken to identify and render aid to the person in the Use of Force Review. 

 

4. 

5. 
 
6. 

 
2. 

 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 10 of 11 

Children and Youth  
 
1. 

As with any encounter, members are expected to continually assess the situation, employ De-
Escalation  Techniques,  and  seek  peaceful  resolutions  during  incidents  involving  children  and 
youth.  

Members  will,  when  feasible,  recognize  and  employ  developmentally-appropriate  and  trauma-
informed tactics including, but not limited to, using a calm and natural demeanor, and avoiding 
threatening language. Members will also account for any fear-based reactions children and youth 
may experience during an encounter.  

When force against a child or young person is necessary, take into account personalized factors 
of  the  child  or  young  person  including,  apparent  age,  body  size,  and  relative  strength  of  the 
member relative to the child or young person; and risk posed by the child or young person; and, 

In the case of injury resulting from a Use of Force, in addition to the requirements to render aid, 
summon medical care and notify a supervisor, the member will notify the child or young person’s 
parent, guardian, or other responsible adult.  

 

 
Reporting 
 
1. 

All  members  will  adhere  to  the  Use  of  Force  guidelines  found  in  Policy  725,  Use  of  Force 
Reporting, Review, and Assessment. 

Members  of  the  BPD  must  notify  a  permanent-rank  supervisor  immediately,  or  as  soon  as 
practicable, following a Use of Force. The supervisor will notify the Shift Commander by the end 
of  the  shift  during  which  the  force  occurred.  The  notification  will  contain  basic  information 
concerning the incident.  Any  member  with  knowledge  that  another  member  used  force  must 
also immediately report  that  Use  of  Force  to  a permanent-rank  supervisor. In all instances, the 
permanent-rank supervisor will conduct a thorough review of the Use of Force, and document this 
review by completing a BlueTeam entry before the conclusion of the supervisor’s tour of duty. 

The failure of any commander, supervisor or member to fulfill any of the requirements of this policy 
will not prevent, inhibit or otherwise affect the ability of the Department to conduct an investigation 
of any misconduct arising from a Use of Force incident or to otherwise discipline a member for 
any violation of this policy.  

 

 
2. 

3. 

 
4. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Policy 1115            

USE OF FORCE 

Page 11 of 11 

 

Less-Lethal Munitions and Chemical Agents  
Level 3 Use of Force Investigations / Special Investigation Response Team (SIRT)  

ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
 
Policy 302,   Rules and Regulations  
Policy 319,   Duty to Intervene 
Policy 409,   Firearms Regulations 
Policy 414,  
Policy 710,  
Policy 719,   Conducted Electrical Weapon  
Policy 724,   Performance Review Board 
Policy 725,   Use of Force Reporting, Review, and Assessment   
Policy 824,   Body-Worn Camera 
Policy 1107,   De-Escalation  
Policy 1111,   Batons / Impact Weapons  
Policy 1114,   Persons in Police Custody  
Policy 1118,   Oleoresin Capsicum Spray  
Policy 1602,  Canine Procedure  
 
 
RECISSION 
 
Remove and destroy/recycle Policy 1115, Use of Force, dated 2 March 2018.   
 
 
COMMUNICATION OF POLICY 
 
This  policy  is  effective  on the date  listed herein.  Each employee  is  responsible for  complying  with  the 
contents of this policy. 

