CHANDLER POLICE
DEPARTMENT
GENERAL ORDERS
Serving with Courage, Pride, and Dedication

Order

Subject

E-01  USE OF FORCE

Effective

100  Overview

04/24/15

Rev

A.  DEFINITIONS
 [1.3.2] [1.3.6]

Term
1.  Approved Weapons

Low Frequency/High Severity

Figure 1: Use of Force Definitions

2. Carotid Restraint
Control Hold

3. Conducted Electrical

Weapon (CEW)

4. Cuffing Under Power

5.  Deadly Force

6.  Deadly Weapon

7. Force Transitions

8.  Graham Test

Definition
Weapons meeting department specifications for which officers receive
proficiency and safety training.  Prior to the use of any approved
weapon option, the officer, when practical, will communicate to other
officers and the subject that the use of the option is imminent, and
clearly and audibly announce the same to all personnel in the
immediate area unless it compromises officer safety.
Bilateral vascular restraint where pressure is applied to the sides of the
neck, resulting in diminished oxygenated blood flow to the brain
without compressing or restricting  the airway
A neuro-muscular incapacitation device that, through the delivery of an
electrical current, stimulates the motor neurons to contract disrupting
communication from the brain to the muscles thereby causing
temporary motor skill dysfunction.
a.  Spark Test

 A non-
discharge electricity

b.  Touch Stun  A secondary function of the CEW intended to

administer localized pain to a subject by making direct contact with
the body without firing the probes

c.  Probe Mode  The primary function of the CEW is intended to

temporarily incapacitate a subject by firing the CEW and deploying
the probes

A tactic where an officer handcuffs a subject while the conducted
electrical weapon (CEW) is cycling and the subject is in neuro-
muscular incapacitation (NMI)
The level of force used to stop a threat that, in the manner of its use or
intended use, is capable of creating a substantial risk of causing death
or serious physical injury
Anything designed for lethal use including a firearm. Deadly weapon
includes, but is not limited to:
a.  A firearm loaded with lethal ammunition (ammunition by design and

application  intended to cause serious bodily injury or death)
b.  Impact weapon when used for intentional strike to the head
c.  Bladed weapons
The objectively reasonable escalation/de-escalation, of the application
of one force type to another based on the standard set in Graham v
Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989)
The type and amount of force used must be justified based on:
1) the severity of the crime involved, (2) whether the suspect posed an
immediate threat to the safety of the officers or others (most important
factor), (3) whether the suspect was actively resisting arrest or
attempting to evade arrest by flight, and 4) the totality of all other
relevant circumstances

USE OF FORCE-Overview 
04/24/15 

 
 

CPD GO E-01.100
Page 2

Term

9. Imminent Threat

10. Intermediate Force

11. Levels of Force

12. Low Level Force

13. Officer

14. Reasonable Belief

15. Reasonable Force

Definition

An impending violent act or resistance that an officer reasonably
believes will occur based on the totality of the circumstances
The level of force necessary to compel compliance by a subject
displaying active aggression, which is neither likely nor intended to
cause death
Broad categories of influence and/or force in identifiable, escalating
stages of intensity.  They are identified as low level force, intermediate
force, and lethal force.
The level of force necessary to interact with a subject who is compliant
or displaying passive or active defensive resistance
For the purposes of use of force policies, references to officer refer to
both sworn police officer and detention officer, unless otherwise noted
The facts or circumstances one knows, or should know, are such as to
cause the ordinary and prudent officer to act or think in a similar way
under similar circumstances
Force which is justified using an objective standard based on the
totality of the circumstances presented at the time of the incident, and
is viewed from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene
rather than using 20/20 hindsight. See General Order E-01.200

16. Serious Physical

Injury

Physical impairment which creates a reasonable risk of death, or
which causes serious and permanent disfigurement, or serious
impairment of health, or loss or protracted impairment of the function
of any bodily organ or limb

B.  POLICY

[1.3.1] [1.3.2]

Rev

DO NOT USE MORE FORCE THAN IS REASONABLY NECESSARY to
accomplish your lawful purpose. In any analysis of a use of force incident,
consideration must be made for the fact that officers are often forced to make
split-second judgments in circumstances that are tense, uncertain, and
rapidly evolving about the amount of force that is necessary in a particular
situation.

1. USE OF ANY FORCE IS USUALLY REACTIONARY (in response to a

subject's actions). Progression normally proceeds from verbal persuasion
through to the use of lethal force.  However, officers may immediately use
any authorized option if reasonable.

2. WHEN FEASIBLE, PRECEDE ANY USE OF DEADLY FORCE BY A VERBAL
WARNING that force will be used if the suspect will not comply. The
warning is unnecessary if it will endanger an officer or take away a
tactical advantage. The officer employing force need not be the officer
giving the warning.

3. USE DEADLY FORCE ONLY WHEN:

a.  You reasonably believe it is necessary to defend yourself or another

person from what you reasonably believe to be the use of, or
imminent use of, deadly physical force

b.  To effect the arrest or prevent the escape from custody of a person
who you reasonably believe has committed, attempted to commit, is

USE OF FORCE-Overview 
04/24/15 

 
 

CPD GO E-01.100
Page 3

C.  ISSUING ORDERS

[1.3.12]

Rev

Rev

D.  AUTHORIZED TECHNIQUES

OR WEAPONS
[1.3.9]

New

E. FORCE TRANSITION

New

F. DE-ESCALATION

committing or is attempting to commit a felony involving the use or
threatened use of deadly force, and if the person is likely to endanger
human life or inflict serious bodily injury to another unless
apprehended without delay

ALL EMPLOYEES AUTHORIZED TO USE FORCE will be issued copies of these
orders and all other policies applicable to the weapon or technique and
provided training in the use of force prior to being authorized to carry a
firearm or use other methods of force

1. ONLY DEPARTMENT-AUTHORIZED WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION may be

used in law enforcement responsibilities

2. ONLY EMPLOYEES TRAINED AND CERTIFIED (where applicable) by a
department-approved instructor or course of instruction on specific
weapons or weapons systems, including firearms, will carry, deploy, or
use those techniques and/or weapons

3. EMPLOYEES MAY USE ANY REASONABLE METHOD TO OVERCOME AN

ACTUAL OR IMMINENT ATTACK if:
  They reasonably believe would produce serious physical injury or

death to the employee or another person and

  Approved or authorized weapons, tactics, or techniques are not

available or practical

4. ALWAYS FOLLOW YOUR TRAINING unless the situation presents a valid

reason to deviate from that training

Transition to differing degrees or types of force, including attempts to de-
escalate in use of force incidents.  Force situations are dynamic and require:
1. CONTINUALLY ASSESSING

proportionate response

2. MODIFYING LEVEL OF CONTROL in relation to the amount and type of

resistance or threat by the subject

Policing requires an officer to exercise control of a violent or resisting subject,
whether to make an arrest, or to protect the officer, other officers, or
members of the community from risk of imminent harm. Not every potential
confrontation can be de-escalated. The decisions and tactics used may
impact the direction and outcome of many situations.

1. GOOD COMMUNICATION SKILLS, patience, and verbal direction resolve
many situations. Voice control often indicates emotional control. A slow,
soft, and deliberate voice conveys control and may diffuse the hostile,
verbally aggressive subject.
IF RESISTANCE CONTINUES after using proper verbal and non-verbal
skills or resistance escalates, be prepared to further escalate the use of
force

2.

3. GATHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE INCIDENT, assess the risks,

assemble resources, attempt to slow momentum, and communicate and

New

G. PHYSICAL RESTRAINT

DEVICES

USE OF FORCE-Overview 
04/24/15 

 
 

CPD GO E-01.100
Page 4

coordinate a response when reasonable under the totality of
circumstances
a.  When practical, use advisements, warnings, verbal persuasion, and
other tactics/alternatives to higher levels of force in interactions with
subjects

b. EXAMPLE: Withdraw to a position that is tactically more secure or

allows greater distance in order to consider or deploy a greater variety
of force options

4. SUPERVISORS ARE EXPECTED TO RESPOND to incidents in a timely

manner where police use of force is probable
a.  Supervisors involved in the management of an overall response to

tactical actions enhance a favorable outcome

b.  Supervisors should possess a good knowledge of tactics and ensure

officers perform to a standard

1. RESTRAINING SUBJECTS: Used to prevent a person from:

  Leaving the scene of a detention or arrest
 

Initiating or escalating violence against the officer, another person
and/or themselves

  Destroying evidence or property

a.  The fact that a person is physically or mentally impaired does not
exempt them from wearing restraining devices when deemed
necessary by the transporting officer.  The type of device used will
depend upon the type and severity of the impairment.  Select a device
to restrain the prisoner securely without intentionally causing injury.

b.  Transporting officers - Use discretion determining the type of

restraining device to be used. Consider the nature of the offense, the
person arrested, level of resistance, and the nature and degree of the
impairment or injury involved.

c.  Escort handcuffed subjects using the approved technique. Refrain

from allowing suspects to walk behind without any type of escort hold.

d.  Place a restrained person in an upright position as soon as practical.

The only exception is for transportation by a medical unit.

e.  Restraint devices:  Approved  handcuffs,

chains, and prisoner belly chain

  device,  leg

2. HANDCUFFS - Issued to officers through the Quartermaster

a.  Only handcuffs authorized by the department and Training Unit may

be used to restrain a person

b.  Restrain a person with their hands behind the back, palms facing out.

Check handcuffs for fit and double-locked.

3. ALTERNATIVE RESTRAINT DEVICE (RIPP RESTRAINT ) - To prevent

handcuffs, to minimize the movements of belligerent or combative
prisoners

a.  Used in situations where conventional restraint methods are not

suitable

New

H.  INTERMEDIATE WEAPONS

USE OF FORCE-Overview 
04/24/15 

 
 

CPD GO E-01.100
Page 5

b.  Do not place suspect in a position where the feet are cinched tightly
and the restraint is attached to or hooked around the handcuff chain.

-

should not be utilized to describe the technique.

c.  Use the device in the manner prescribed in training. Only officers who
have successfully completed training in their use are authorized to
use these devices.

d.  Only devices (RIPP Restraint

) issued by the department shall be
used. Alternative restraint devices may be carried in a holder on the
duty belt.

4. LEG CHAINS AND BELLY CHAINS - Detention Officers will adhere to

General Order E-12.100.D (outlines use)

IMPACT WEAPONS - The Training Unit maintains a list of authorized
intermediate weapons. Any modifications to these devices shall be approved
by the Training Unit Supervisor prior to use.

1. Straight Baton - An impact weapon made of a 20 to 26 inch solid

polycarbonate or wood baton that is black or tan in color

2. Side Handle Baton - Specialized baton of similar configuration to the

Monadnok PR-24 baton and may be individually purchased by the officer.
Requires training by the Training Unit prior to deployment.

3. Expandable Baton - Baton is capable of being expanded from a more
compact, retracted status.  Specifications on approved expandable
batons models are maintained by the Training Unit.

4. Flashlight - Primary use of the flashlight is for illumination purposes. The
flashlight may be used as an impact device when the use of a baton is not
practical or readily available. Transition to the approved baton when it can
be done safely.

