12.545 

12.545  USE OF FORCE 

References: 

Graham vs. Connor, 490 US 386, 396 (1989) 
Tennessee vs. Garner, 471 US 1 (1985) 
Manual of Rules and Regulations - 1.01, 1.21, 1.22, 1.23, 1.24, 1.25, 2.12, 2.26A&B, 4.05 
Procedure 12.140, Canine Operations 
Procedure 12.150, Plan for Control for Disorders at Hamilton County Adult Correctional 

Facilities 

Procedure 12.155, Juvenile Youth Center Disorders 
Procedure 12.170, Civil Disturbance Operation Procedure 
Procedure 12.536, Foot Pursuits 
Procedure 12.550, Discharging of Firearms by Police Personnel 
Procedure 12.554, Investigatory Stops 
Procedure 12.600, Prisoners: Securing, Handling, and Transporting 
Procedure 12.625, Flying Armed on Official Business 
Procedure 12.905, Fingerprinting and Photographing of Juveniles 
Procedure 15.100, Citizen Complaints and Reports of Favorable Police Conduct  
Procedure 19.106, Post Critical Incident Trauma 
Procedure 19.110, Peer Support Crisis Intervention Team 

Definitions: 

Actively Resisting Arrest – When the subject is making physically evasive movements to 
defeat the officer’s attempt at control, including fleeing, bracing, tensing, pushing, or 
verbally signaling an intention to avoid or prevent being taken into or retained in custody. 

Choke Holds – The courts could consider a choke hold or other similar type holds as 
deadly force.  Choke holds are prohibited unless a situation arises where the use of deadly 
force is permissible under existing law and Department policy.  The use of any type choke 
hold to prevent the swallowing of evidence is prohibited. 

Carotid Artery – A collection of nerves continues along the carotid artery located on the 
side of the neck and extends from the lower jaw bone to the collar bone. 

Brachial Nerve – Part of the central nervous system which is located along the inner 
arms, extending from the armpit to the elbow. 

Common Peroneal Nerve – Part of the central nervous system which is located along the 
outer legs, extending from the knee to the ankle. 

Crowd Management – The observing, monitoring, and facilitating the activities of persons 
assembled. 

Crowd Control – The use of police action to stop the activities of persons assembled. 

Deadly Force – Force likely to cause, or capable of causing, death. 

Escorting – The use of light pressure to guide a person or keep a person in place. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

1 

12.545 

Force – Any physical strike, instrumental contact with a person, or any significant physical 
contact that restricts movement of a person.  The term includes, but is not limited to, the 
use of: firearms, TASERs, chemical irritant, choke holds or hard hands, the taking of a 
subject to the ground, or the deployment of a canine.  The term does not include escorting 
or handcuffing a person with no or minimal resistance. 

Grenadier – Officers who have been specially trained by the Tactical Coordination Unit 
(TCU) to operate as 2-person teams during periods of civil unrest.  These officers are 
trained in deployment of the Beanbag shotgun, PepperBall launcher, 40mm foam rounds, 
Oleoresin Capsicum (OC) blast grenades, and OC aerosol canisters.  Beanbag shotgun 
grenadiers are independent assets and will support the 2-person teams as needed. 

40mm Foam Marking Round – Rounds which are similar to and are used in the same 
manner as the 40mm foam rounds.  The 40mm foam marking rounds are designed to 
leave a green powder substance on the subject(s) struck by these rounds. 

OC Aerosol Canister –The OC aerosol canister is a hand-held device with a steel “pull-
ring” type safety pin which prevents accidental discharges.  This chemical irritant offers a 
non-lethal alternative for use in crowd control situations to aid in controlling and 
disseminating crowds. 

OC Blast Grenade – The OC blast grenade is a rubber ball type device approximately the 
size of a tennis ball, with a steel “pull-ring” safety pin which is pulled before deploying the 
device into a crowd.  The OC blast grenade contains a non-lethal chemical irritant which is 
used in crowd control situations to aid in controlling and disseminating crowds. 

Hard Hands – The use of physical pressure to force a person against an object or the 
ground, use of physical strength or skill that causes pain or leaves a mark, leverage 
displacement, joint manipulation, pain compliance, and pressure point control tactics. 

Original documents – Photographs, DVR discs or video files, and any documents that 
are handwritten or contain an original signature. 

Serious Use of Force – Any action that involves: a critical firearm discharge; the use of 
deadly force; a baton strike to the head; or a use of force in which the person is seriously 
injured or requires hospital admission, with the exception of individuals admitted for 
psychiatric evaluation not suffering a serious injury. 

Self-Defense – The act of protecting oneself or another from physical harm or serious 
physical harm. 

Serious Injury/Serious Physical Harm to Persons – Any of the following: 

•  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death. 
•  Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, 

or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity. 

•  Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement or that involves 

some temporary, serious disfigurement. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

2 

12.545 

Use of Force in Crowd Management and/or Control – Officers will not initiate the use of 
force or chemical irritant against crowds or a group of individuals except when reasonable 
and necessary to protect the officer, the subject, or another party from a risk of death or 
physical harm; or is necessary to effect the arrest of an actively resisting subject; or to 
prevent the escape of that subject. 

Officers encountering crowds will evaluate the situation and determine if there is a current 
or future need requiring crowd control or crowd management.  Prior to police action, the 
officers will promptly summon a supervisor to the scene.  If crowd control is or will be 
required, the supervisor will summon a command officer to the scene.  Once on the scene, 
the command officer will direct all police action and authorize the use of weapons, tools, or 
tactics needed to resolve the situation.  The approval of a supervisor is required any time 
chemical irritant is used against a crowd, absent exigent circumstances. 

Use of force (including the beanbag shotgun, the 40mm foam round, OC aerosol canister, 
OC blast grenade, and the PepperBall launcher) as well as the use of chemical irritant 
during periods of civil unrest or for crowd management is restricted.  A command officer 
must be present and must authorize the deployment of these devices, absent exigent 
circumstances. 

Command officers must give verbal notice prior to deploying these devices into a crowd 
unless it would present a danger to the officer or others to give such a warning. 

Any deployment of the beanbag shotgun, 40mm foam round, or PepperBall launcher 
during crowd management/control requires: 

•  Specific targeting of a subject by the officer. 

•  Under no circumstances should any of these devices be deployed into a crowd 

without first identifying a specific target that represents an imminent risk of death or 
physical injury to the officer or others. 

•  The officer must be reasonably sure the weapons will not strike other individuals in 

the crowd who pose no threat of violence. 

If demonstrators or protesters are in a place they have a legal right to be and are 
conducting themselves in a non-violent and lawful manner, an officer cannot make their 
conduct criminal by ordering them to disperse and arresting them if they refuse. 

Information: 

Beanbag shotgun and 40mm foam rounds:  The beanbag shotgun and 40mm foam 
rounds are impact projectile devices that offer a less lethal alternative for subduing or 
incapacitating a subject to prevent imminent physical harm, while maintaining officer 
safety.  The beanbag shotgun and 40mm foam rounds are restricted for use by SWAT 
personnel and grenadiers trained by TCU. 

TASER:  The TASER is an electronic control device that is a non-lethal force alternative 
used to assist officers in the performance of their duties.  The TASER is designed for self-
defense or to temporarily immobilize a subject who is actively resisting arrest.  It 
generates electricity in a small, hand-held, battery operated unit about the size of a 
handgun. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

3 

12.545 

When properly used, the TASER generates an electrical current that dominates the 
existing neuromuscular and sensory nervous system.  Subjects become physically 
incapacitated and unable to control muscle movement, allowing officers to gain control. 

The TASER may be used in situations where time and conditions permit.  It can be an 
extremely effective control device for close range incapacitation. 

When deploying a cartridge from the TASER, frontal shots are prohibited except in 
situations of self-defense or defense of another.  The TASER should never be aimed at an 
individual’s head, neck, eyes, throat, chest/breast, or genitals.  The preferred target area is 
the back of the individual actively resisting arrest.  The TASER should never be 
deployed on an individual operating a moving vehicle. 

In rare circumstances, there have been medical concerns raised about TASER barbs 
deployed to the chest region causing sudden cardiac arrest.  According to the 
manufacturer of the TASER, the aforementioned preferred target areas increase the 
distance of the dart-to-heart safety margin.  When deployed in the drive stun mode, the 
neck and groin are acceptable targets. 

Each TASER has an internal tracking chip.  Supervisors can retrieve information stored in 
the data chip by connecting to the data port on the rear of the weapon and downloading 
the information into the Department’s computer system 

All TASERs will be downloaded at the officer’s unit of assignment twice per year, 
coinciding with the beginning and end dates of Daylight Savings Time. Supervisors will 
download the previous six months’ data stored on the TASER data chip of their personnel.  
The downloaded information will be stored in the “TASER Downloads” folder located on 
the H: drive.  Instructions for electronically saving downloaded data can be accessed by 
opening the PDF file titled, “TASER Download Instructions” located in the “TASER 
Downloads” folder on the H: drive. 

District/section/unit commanders will ensure a supervisor reviews each download for 
activations not consistent with daily spark tests or previously documented use of force 
incidents. 

The following activations require the investigating supervisor to provide a brief response 
on a Form 17 to the affected district/section/unit commander justifying the activation, 
including the corresponding ETS number, if applicable: 

•  Activations not consistent with daily spark tests or previously documented use of 

force incidents. 

•  Activations lasting ten seconds or longer in duration. 

•  Three or more consecutive activations with minimal time in between the activations. 

Unresolved activations which require further investigation must be documented on a Form 
17 to the Police Chief. 

Vagal Nerve Stimulator (VNS):  This device sends pulses of very low current electricity to 
the brain to prevent seizures in epileptic persons.  Officers with knowledge an individual 
has a VNS should avoid the use of the TASER as a force option. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

4 

12.545 

Chemical irritant:  Chemical irritant offers a non-lethal alternative for controlling, 
subduing, or apprehending a suspect(s) who is actively resisting arrest.  Chemical 
irritant leaves an invisible ultraviolet, light-sensitive dye on an individual, which can aid in 
identification.  The use of chemical irritant, including the use of chemical irritant against a 
crowd or a group of individuals is only permitted in those cases in which such force is 
necessary to protect the officer, the subject, or another party from physical harm; or is 
necessary to effect the arrest of an actively resisting subject; or prevent the escape of 
that subject. 

Chemical irritant or the TASER is the primary response for self-defense, defense of 
another or gaining compliance from a person(s) actively resisting arrest.  The use of 
chemical irritant or the TASER (in the drive stun mode) on an individual attempting to 
swallow evidence or contraband is only permitted when all of the following apply: 

•  There is a clear indication the object or substance in the subject’s mouth is 

contraband and; 

medical emergency and; 

refuses to comply. 

•  There are exigent circumstances such as the imminent destruction of evidence or 

•  The officer has issued verbal commands to spit out any contraband and the subject 

Personnel may only use chemical irritant when verbal commands and other techniques 
that do not require the use of force would be ineffective or where issuing verbal commands 
would present a danger to the officer or others. 

When possible, a verbal warning must be issued to the subject that chemical irritant will be 
used prior to the use of chemical irritant, unless exigent circumstances exist that would 
make it imprudent to do so.  When possible, the officer will defer using chemical irritant for 
a reasonable time to allow the subject to comply with the warning.  Chemical irritant should 
only be aimed at the subject’s face and upper torso. 

Employee Tracking Solution:  If the Employee Tracking Solution (ETS) is down due to 
maintenance or mechanical problems, supervisors should document a use of force 
incident on the appropriate form on the H: drive.  Supervisors should complete a draft copy 
of the use of force report and fax it to the required units.  Supervisors should then retain 
the draft document until ETS is operational, at which point the information from the draft 
document should be entered into ETS and processed according to this procedure. 

Monadnock PR-24/ Monadnock Auto-Lock Batons:  Monadnock PR-24 and Auto-Lock 
batons are impact tools that offer a less lethal method for self-defense, defense of another, 
or subduing and apprehending subjects who are actively resisting arrest.  Compared to 
empty hand counter strikes, the baton is less likely to cause injury to the officer and 
provides added distance from the subject.  Officers should target center mass of a 
subject’s torso, arms, and legs, and avoid the subject’s head, throat, neck, heart, and 
groin, unless threatened with serious physical harm. 

All Department members who have attended crowd control training have been trained in 
the use of the Monadnock PR-24 batons.  Personnel may use the PR-24 only when 
deployed in crowd control formations.  Twenty (20) PR-24 batons are stored in each of the 
five (5) district Civil Disturbance Operation Procedure (CDOP) vans. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

5 

12.545 

PepperBall:  The PepperBall launcher is a non-lethal tool that provides another alternative 
for self-defense, defense of another or apprehending subjects who are actively resisting 
arrest.  This impact and chemical irritant device is capable of incapacitating subjects, 
thereby reducing their ability to continue aggressive action. 

Use of Force Review Board:  The Use of Force Review Board will conduct 
comprehensive reviews of the following use of force incidents: 

•  A use of force resulting in hospitalization or serious injury to a subject or police officer 

involved in a use of force incident; 

•  A use of force that includes a citizen’s complaint of unnecessary or excessive force 

by an officer; 

•  Any use of force incident recommended for review by a district/section/unit 

commander and approved by the Police Chief. 

Use of force incidents involving the discharge of firearms by police are not included in this 
process and are addressed by the Firearms Discharge Board (Procedure 12.550).  Uses 
of force involving beanbag, OC aerosol canister, OC blast grenades, and 40mm foam 
round discharges are reviewable by the Use of Force Review Board. 

•  One captain from Investigations Bureau or Patrol Bureau (rotating assignment); 

The Use of Force Review Board consists of: 

•  The affected district/section commander; 

•  Training and Development Section Commander  

•  Inspections Unit Commander; 

•  An Assistant Police Chief (rotating assignment). 

Professional Standards Section (PSS) will coordinate Use of Force Review Board action 
and will schedule Review Board meetings and provide all documentation to board 
members on cases assigned by the Police Chief. 

An Assistant Police Chief will chair the Review Board meetings.  The Review Board will 
prepare a final report to the Police Chief containing a description of the incident including 
all uses of force, a summary and analysis of all relevant evidence, proposed findings, and 
analysis to support those findings. 

The Review Board will determine whether all uses of force during the encounter were 
consistent with Department policy and training, whether the involved officers employed 
proper tactics, and whether lesser force alternatives were reasonably available. 

Policy: 

A police officer’s right to make an arrest or investigatory stop necessarily carries with it the 
right to use some degree of physical coercion, or threat thereof, to effect it.  Determining 
whether the force used to effect a particular seizure is reasonable under the Fourth 
Amendment requires a careful balancing of the nature and quality of the intrusion on the 
individual’s Fourth Amendment interests against the countervailing governmental interests 
at stake (Graham v. Connor, 1989). 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

6 

12.545 

Before any use of force option is employed by an officer to effect an arrest, its proper 
application requires careful attention to the facts and circumstances of each particular 
case, including: 

The severity of the crime at issue; 

1) 
2)  Whether the suspect poses an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or 

3)  Whether the suspect is actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest 

others; 

by flight. 

Courtesy in all public contacts encourages understanding and cooperation.  The most 
desirable method for effecting an arrest is where a suspect complies with simple directions 
given by an officer. 

When officers are confronted with a situation where control is required to effect an arrest 
or protect the public’s safety, officers should attempt to achieve control through advice, 
warnings, and persuasion. 

The suspect should be allowed to submit to arrest before force is used unless this causes 
unnecessary danger to the officer or others. 

When officers have a right to make an arrest, they may use whatever force is 
reasonably necessary to apprehend the offender or effect the arrest and no more.  
Just as officers must be prepared to respond appropriately to rising levels of 
resistance, they must likewise be prepared to promptly de-escalate the use of force 
as the subject de-escalates or comes under police control. 
Officers must avoid using unnecessary violence.  Their privilege to use force is not limited 
to that amount of force necessary to protect themselves or others, but extends to that 
amount reasonably necessary to enable them to effect the arrest of an actively resistant 
subject. 

Force situations often do not allow for an ordinal progression up a continuum of force and 
officers must be ready to escalate or de-escalate as the situation evolves. 

USE OF FORCE CONTINUUM 

Examples of Subject Resistance 

•  Uncooperative:  Subject fails to respond to verbal commands or other directions. 

•  Active resistance:  Subject is making physically evasive movements to defeat the 
officer’s attempt at control, including bracing, tensing, pushing, fleeing, or verbally 
signaling an intention to avoid or prevent being taken into or retained in custody. 

•  Assault or threat of assault:  Subject assumes fighting stance, charges, strikes, or 
kicks an officer or verbally or physically indicates an intention to commit an assault 
combined with the subject’s capability to assault. 

•  Life threatening assault or assault likely to cause serious physical harm:  Subject 

commits an attack using an object, a weapon, or an empty hand assault, wherein the 
officer reasonably believes the assault will result in serious physical harm and/or 
death. 

 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

7 

12.545 

Examples of Officer/Subject Factors 

•  Physical size 
•  Influence of alcohol or drugs on subject 
•  Subject’s mental capacity or impairment 
•  Multiple suspects 

 
Examples of Special Circumstances 

•  Environmental factors 
•  Distance from subject 
•  Officer injury exhaustion 
•  Proximity of weapon 

 
 

Force Options 

•  Officer presence 
•  Verbal skills 
•  TASER /Chemical irritant 
•  Escort techniques 
•  Balance displacement 
•  Hard hands (pressure points/strikes) 

 
•  Officer on ground 
•  Special knowledge 
•  Crime involved 
•  History/knowledge of subject 

•  Monadnock PR-24 
•  PepperBall launcher (Non-lethal) 
•  Beanbag shotgun (Less than lethal) 
•  40mm foam round (Less than lethal) 
•  Deadly force 
•  Monadnock Auto-Lock baton 

Each force situation is unique and this continuum is intended only as an illustration of the 
various force options available to an officer facing a given level of subject resistance.  This 
continuum is not intended to preclude a force option when that option would not exceed 
the amount of force reasonably necessary to effect a lawful arrest (Graham v. Connor, 
1989).  Good judgment and the circumstances of each situation will dictate the level on the 
continuum of force at which an officer will start.  Depending on the circumstances, officers 
may find it necessary to escalate and de-escalate the use of force by progressing up and 
down the force continuum.  It is not the intent of this continuum to require officers to try 
each of the options before moving to the next, as long as the level of force used is 
reasonable under the circumstances. 

Disengagement is a reasonable option in consideration of officer safety and the necessity 
to apprehend promptly.  Disengagement, area containment, surveillance, waiting-out a 
subject, summoning reinforcements, or calling in specialized units may be an appropriate 
response to a situation and should be considered. 

Force options may be used simultaneously, for instance, combining verbal commands with 
use of chemical irritant.  The officer must choose the necessary response based on law, 
department policy, training, and experience.  The officer must exercise proper use of force 
decision making, which means the use of reasonable force, including proper tactics, and 
de-escalation techniques. 

All members have a duty to ensure the use of force and any citizen allegation of excessive 
force are reported to the Police Department.  Whenever employees use deadly force, 
force, hard hand tactics, chemical irritant, the TASER; or confront resistance that results in 
an injury or complaint of injury to a citizen; or have knowledge of any of the above; or are 
aware of a citizen complaint of excessive force, they will promptly notify a supervisor.  The 
supervisor or command officer investigating the incident must be of at least the next higher 
rank than the officer(s) who used force. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

8 

12.545 

The only exception is when a lieutenant uses force and there is no captain or above 
working, but an acting Night Inspector (lieutenant) is available.  In this case, the acting 
Night Inspector can conduct the investigation. 

The Criminal Investigation Section (CIS) will respond for all shots fired and death 
investigations involving police, and for other incidents at the direction of the Bureau 
commander.  PSS will respond and investigate all deadly and serious uses of force and 
canine bites that cause serious injury or hospital admission.  This includes, but may not be 
limited to: 

•  Action that directly or indirectly results in a person being seriously injured, admitted 

to a hospital, or killed (including injuries that are self-inflicted). 

•  All head strikes with an impact weapon. 

•  All uses of a carotid/choke hold. 

Officers who use excessive force will be subject to discipline, possible criminal 
prosecution, and/or civil liability. 

Following any use of force resulting in a citizen’s injury, officers will ensure appropriate first 
aid is rendered promptly once the incident scene is stabilized. 

Procedure: 

A.  Use of the TASER 

1. 

The TASER may be deployed on a suspect actively resisting arrest when 
there is probable cause to arrest the suspect, or to defend one’s self or another 
from active aggression. 

a.  An individual simply fleeing from an officer, absent additional justification, 

does not warrant the use of the TASER. 

b.  Officers shall consider the following prior to utilization of the TASER as a 

force option: 

The severity of the crime at issue 

1) 

2) 

3) 

4) 

The level of suspicion with respect to the fleeing suspect. 

The risk of danger posed to others if the suspect is not promptly 
apprehended. 

The potential risk of secondary injury to the suspect due to 
environmental conditions. 

2.  Use the TASER for self-defense or to control subjects that are actively 

resisting arrest.  When possible, give the subject a verbal warning the TASER 
will be deployed unless exigent circumstances exist that would make it 
imprudent to do so. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

9 

12.545 

a.  Officers should avoid using the TASER on obviously pregnant females 

and those individuals under the age of 7 or over the age of 70 due to the 
potential for these individuals to fall when incapacitated by the TASER, 
unless the encounter rises to the level of a deadly force situation. 

b.  Officers should avoid using the TASER on individuals who are on an 

elevated surface unless the encounter rises to the level of a deadly force 
situation. 

3.  Officers should, if possible, obtain backup before using the TASER to control 

the subject. 

a.  Deploy personnel in such a manner that will enable them to use other 

means to subdue the subject if the TASER is ineffective. 

b.  Officers will use caution and avoid standing near the subject. 

4.  Depressing the trigger on the TASER will propel two darts from the attached 

cartridge.  Once the TASER is fired, it will automatically cycle for five seconds.  
The officer can turn it off before the five-second cycle stops.  However, it is 
recommended officers permit the TASER to cycle for the full five seconds to 
maximize effectiveness.  Officers should give commands to the suspect and 
attempt to gain compliance. 

a. 

It is necessary for both darts in a cartridge to hit some part of the 
suspect's clothing or body for total incapacitation.  However, if only one 
dart penetrates the subject, the TASER is only partially effective.  Should 
this occur and the subject continues to act aggressively, place the TASER 
against the subject’s body to complete the circuit, causing complete 
incapacitation. 

b. 

The TASER has a red dot laser and a built in flashlight that activates as 
soon as the TASER is turned on.  Both of these features can be 
deactivated, if desired. 

5. 

If a first shot is ineffective, the officer may reload and attempt a second shot.  If 
the TASER deployments are ineffective, it may be used in the drive stun mode.  
The TASER can operate in the drive stun mode with or without the fired 
cartridge attached.  You cannot use the TASER in the drive stun mode on the 
neck or groin with a non-fired cartridge attached to the TASER. 

a.  While operating the TASER in the drive stun mode, the carotid/brachial, 
groin, and common peroneal nerve are the preferred target areas of the 
body.  A drive stun is described as pushing the TASER aggressively 
against the subject’s body while pulling the trigger.  This will deliver a 
shock to that area of the body.  A drive stun can be used for self-defense, 
defense of another, or to gain compliance from a subject(s) actively 
resisting arrest, and persons attempting to swallow evidence or 
contraband. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

10 

12.545 

b.  Due to the high voltage electronic spark of the TASER, NEVER fire the 
TASER near flammable materials (such as chemical irritant with an 
alcohol-based propellant, gasoline, kerosene, or in a natural gas 
environment). 

c. 

After an officer has fired a TASER cartridge, a new cartridge will be issued 
to the officer by their immediate supervisor. 

6.  Avoid prolonged, extended, uninterrupted discharges or extensive multiple 

discharges. 

a.  Use of the TASER should be combined with physical restraint techniques 

to minimize the total duration of the struggle and TASER use. 

1)  Additional officers on the scene of a TASER deployment should 

attempt to restrain and handcuff a subject during an active TASER 
cycle. 

2)  Officers should transition to a different force option if multiple TASER 

deployments fail to gain compliance or continued TASER 
applications are not making sufficient progress toward gaining 
compliance. 

7.  Discharging the TASER at Animals 

a. 

The TASER is an effective tool for stopping the aggressive behavior of 
wild or potentially dangerous animals.  The TASER is especially effective 
for vicious and/or dangerous dogs. 

b.  Officers using a TASER on an animal may need to adjust their aim to 

ensure contact is made with both probes. 

8.  Standard Medical Treatment 

a.  Officers will obtain appropriate medical treatment for suspects when 

necessary.  After a successful TASER deployment, request Cincinnati Fire 
Department (CFD) respond to evaluate the subject. 

b.  Officers may remove darts embedded in a subject's skin using the 

appropriate technique provided the darts are not embedded in soft body 
tissue, i.e., genitals, breast tissue, or any area above the collar bone. 

1) 

If the darts are embedded in the soft body tissue described above: 

a) 

b) 

Transport to University Hospital for treatment and dart removal 
any person 13 years of age and older. 

Transport to Children’s Hospital for treatment and dart removal 
any person 12 years of age and younger. 

2)  Used TASER cartridges and darts are considered a biohazard.  

Place the used cartridge and darts in a biohazard receptacle at a fire 
station or hospital. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

11 

12.545 

9.  Emergency Medical Treatment 

a. 

In rare situations following a TASER deployment in which the TASER 
projectiles embed in a suspect’s upper-chest area and the suspect 
becomes immediately unconscious, rapid emergency medical treatment is 
necessary due to the possibility of ventricular fibrillation leading to cardiac 
arrest. 

1)  Promptly notify the Emergency Communications Center (ECC) to 

expedite dispatch of CFD personnel. 

2)  Begin administering first-responder basic life support measures, 

such as CPR, while awaiting arrival of EMS/EMTs. 

3)  Ensure an officer accompanies the suspect to the hospital during 

transportation by ambulance, in the event the suspect becomes 
combative upon regaining consciousness. 

B.  Use of Chemical Irritant 

1.  When possible, a verbal warning must be issued to the subject that chemical 

irritant will be used prior to the use of chemical irritant unless exigent 
circumstances exist that would make it imprudent to do so. 

2.  When feasible, officers will defer using the chemical irritant a reasonable time to 

allow the individual to comply with the verbal warning. 

3.  Officers may only use chemical irritant on a restrained individual when the 
restrained individual is likely to escape or suffer injury; or another person is 
likely to suffer injury, absent the use of the chemical irritant. 

4. 

If it is necessary to use chemical irritant on a violent prisoner who is handcuffed 
and in the rear seat of the police vehicle, officers will not open the rear doors of 
the police vehicle to spray the prisoner.  Instead, officers will spray the prisoner 
through the protective screen. 

a. 

If the vehicle is equipped with a Plexiglas partition, officers can either slide 
the partition to an open position and spray the prisoner through the 
opening or spray the prisoner through the rear door window nearest the 
prisoner’s face. 

b. 

This should be rare and used only after officers issue a verbal warning 
and when other uses of force would be ineffective. 

5.  When spraying chemical irritant, target an individual’s face and upper torso.  If 
possible, stay five to ten feet away from an individual and administer the 
chemical irritant in 3-second bursts. 

6.  Officers may not keep a sprayed individual in a face-down position any longer 

than necessary to handcuff or end the threat of harm or escape. 

7.  Absent exigent circumstances, officers will offer to decontaminate every 
sprayed individual within 20 minutes of the use of chemical irritant. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

12 

12.545 

a.  Expose individuals sprayed with chemical irritant to fresh air.  Give them 

an opportunity to rinse their face with plenty of clear, cool water; or the 
use of a decontamination wipe. 

b. 

Individuals should not rub or hold their faces, or use any oils, creams, or 
ointments. 

8.  Officers are required to request medical assistance for sprayed individuals in 

the following circumstances: 

a.  When the individual complains of continued effects after having been 

decontaminated. 

b. 

c. 

The individual indicates they have a pre-existing medical condition that 
may be aggravated by the chemical irritant, e.g., asthma, emphysema, 
bronchitis, heart ailment, etc. 

Promptly request a supervisor and CFD respond to the scene if a person 
is suspected of putting in their mouth, swallowing, or attempting to 
swallow any substance or item suspected as capable of causing physical 
harm, injury, or death. 

1) 

If necessary, CFD will transport the suspect for prompt medical 
treatment.  If CFD requests the Police Department transport the 
suspect, officers will: 

a)  Promptly transport to University Hospital any person 13 years 

b)  Promptly transport to Children’s Hospital any person 12 years 

of age and older. 

of age and younger. 

C.  Use of the OC Aerosol Canister and OC Blast Grenade 

1.  Only trained SWAT officers and grenadiers are permitted to deploy the OC 

aerosol or OC blast grenades in crowd control situations. 

a.  During periods of civil unrest, at the direction of a command officer, 

grenadiers are permitted to deploy PepperBall launchers, 40mm foam 
rounds, OC canisters and OC grenades. 

2.  Grenadiers will work as a 2-person team during crowd control and civil unrest 
situations.  One grenadier will carry a 40mm launcher while another grenadier 
will carry the PepperBall launcher and deploy the OC grenades and canisters. 

D.  Use of PepperBall Launcher 

1.  PepperBall launchers will be assigned to the districts at the discretion of the 

Police Chief. 

2. 

The PepperBall round consists of a small, hard, plastic sphere containing OC 
pepper powder. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

13 

12.545 

3. 

The PepperBall launcher is a semi-automatic, shoulder-mounted, high capacity 
weapon, powered by compressed air. 

a.  Each district will be assigned one Self Contained Breathing Apparatus 

(SCBA) compressed air tank and a PepperBall fill adapter. 

b.  SCBA tanks can be refilled by the CFD at their facility located on West 5th 

Street at Central Avenue. 

4.  Only supervisors and officers trained in the use of PepperBall launchers are 

permitted to use the weapons. 

a. 

b. 

The presence of a second officer is highly recommended in the event the 
officer using the PepperBall launcher encounters lethal resistance. 

If serious injury requiring hospitalization occurs from the use of the 
PepperBall, follow the notification process for shots fired as outlined in 
Procedure 12.550, Discharging of Firearms by Police Personnel. 

5.  When using the PepperBall launcher, aim at center mass.  Avoid the head, 

neck, and genitals, if possible.  The effective range of the PepperBall is 0 to 30 
feet for targeting individuals; and up to 100 feet for area saturation. 

a.  Generally, four to ten rounds should be deployed at a subject.  More 

rounds may be utilized if, in the opinion of the officer, the additional rounds 
will assist in gaining compliance of the individual. 

b.  Heavy clothing can hinder the effectiveness of the PepperBall rounds.  If a 

subject is wearing heavy clothing, consider targeting the legs. 

c. 

Subjects struck with PepperBall rounds often lower their head and turn 
away from the source of impact.  It is important to anticipate this reaction 
when employing PepperBall rounds. 

d.  Decontamination for individuals exposed to PepperBall OC powder is 

fresh air and clear, cool water. 

6.  PepperBall rounds can be used to saturate an area with OC powder by aiming 

the rounds at solid objects such as buildings, walls, or the ground. 

7.  After using the PepperBall launcher, and after the individual is under control, 

inform onlookers the PepperBall launcher is a non-lethal alternative designed to 
apprehend individuals without causing serious injury. 

a.  Officers are exempt from the notification requirements during incidents 

involving civil unrest. 

E.  Use of Beanbag Shotgun 

1.  Only SWAT officers and grenadiers trained by TCU in the use of the beanbag 

shotgun are permitted to use the weapon. 

2.  A beanbag shotgun shell is a standard 2 3/4 inch, 12 gauge shotgun shell with 

a transparent hull. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

14 

12.545 

a.  Stocks on beanbag shotguns are orange and clearly labeled as "less-

b.  Never load regular shotgun ammunition into beanbag shotguns or vice 

lethal". 

versa. 

3.  When using a beanbag shotgun, the recommended distance is no less than 20 
feet and no more than 75 feet from a suspect.  Beanbag rounds have an 
optimal effective range of 20 to 50 feet with a maximum effective range of 75 
feet. 

a.  Using a beanbag shotgun within 20 feet of an individual increases the 

chance of serious injury.  In cases involving self-defense, defense of 
another, or a situation where the round is used as an alternative to deadly 
force when deadly force would be appropriate, the use of the beanbag 
round at a distance less than 20 feet is acceptable. 

If serious injury requiring hospitalization occurs from using a beanbag 
shotgun, follow the notification process for shots fired as outlined in 
Procedure 12.550. 

4.  When using a beanbag shotgun, target a specific part of the body. Avoid the 

head, neck, heart, and genitals, if possible. 

Transport any person 13 years of age and older struck with a beanbag 
round to University Hospital for medical evaluation. 

Transport any person 12 years of age and younger struck with a beanbag 
round to Children’s Hospital for medical evaluation. 

b. 

a. 

b. 

5.  While multiple beanbag rounds may be expended as necessary, no more than 

two beanbag shotguns should be simultaneously deployed on an individual. 

6. 

If four rounds prove to be ineffective, officers need to consider another option. 

7.  After using a beanbag shotgun, and after an individual is under control, notify 

onlookers a beanbag shotgun, not a regular shotgun, was used.  Inform the 
onlookers the beanbag shotgun is a less lethal alternative designed to 
apprehend individuals without causing serious injury. 

a.  Officers are exempt from the notification requirements during incidents 

involving civil unrest. 

F.  Use of 40mm Foam Round 

1. 

2. 

40mm foam round launchers are assigned to SWAT and grenadiers trained by 
the TCU. 

The 40mm foam round consists of a soft rubber sponged nose attached to a 
hard plastic carrier. 

3. 

The 40mm foam round launcher is a single shot, shoulder-mounted weapon. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

15 

12.545 

4.  Only SWAT officers and grenadiers trained in the use of the 40mm foam round 

launcher are permitted to use this system.  

a. 

The presence of a second officer is highly recommended in the event the 
officer using the 40mm foam round launcher encounters lethal resistance. 

b.  Where the distance between the officer and the target makes it practical, 
verbal warnings will be given prior to use, absent exigent circumstances.  
When feasible, officers will allow a reasonable time between the warning 
and use of the foam round. 

c. 

If serious injury requiring hospitalization occurs from using a 40mm foam 
round, follow the notification process for shots fired as outlined in 
Procedure 12.550. 

5.  When using the 40mm foam round, target a specific part of the body. Avoid the 

head, neck, heart, and genitals, if possible.  The 40mm foam round will prove 
most successful for incapacitation when used within its optimal energy range of 
approximately 10 to 75 feet, although it may be used in situations from 5 to 120 
feet. 

a. 

b. 

Transport any person 13 years of age and older struck with a 40mm foam 
round to University Hospital for medical evaluation. 

Transport any person 12 years of age and younger struck with a 40mm 
foam round to Children’s Hospital for medical evaluation. 

6. 

If four rounds prove to be ineffective, officers need to consider another option. 

7.  After using the 40mm foam round launcher, and after an individual is under 

control, inform onlookers the 40mm foam round is a less lethal alternative 
designed to apprehend individuals without causing serious injury. 

a.  Officers are exempt from the notification requirements during incidents 

involving civil unrest. 

G.  Use of the Monadnock PR-24 

1.  Use of the Monadnock PR-24’s is restricted to officers in crowd control 

formations only. 

times. 

a.  All PR-24’s must remain stored in the district CDOP vans at all other 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

16 

12.545 

H.  Reporting a Use of Force 

Force Used 

Reporting Requirement 

Deployment of police canine (no 
bite). 

Form 18C, explaining circumstances that led to the 
deployment. 

Escorting or handcuffing a person, 
with no or minimal resistance. 

No special reporting required other than the narrative of the 
arrest report. 

“Hard hands” use of force by means 
of leverage displacement, joint 
manipulation, pain compliance, or 
pressure point control tactics 
without injury or complaint. 

“Hard hands” use of force with injury 
or complaint of injury. 

The arresting officer(s) are required to notify a supervisor and 
document a narrative account of the subject’s form(s) of 
resistance and the officer’s specific defensive tactic used to 
overcome that resistance in the narrative of the arrest report 
and complete Form 18NC, Noncompliant Suspect/Arrestee 
Report, to be reviewed and approved by a supervisor.  The 
use of force report will require the officer to identify the events 
leading up to the use of force and the supervisor will be 
required to evaluate the tactics used by the officer. 

The arresting officer(s) are required to notify a supervisor.  The 
supervisor’s report will include the following information in the 
narrative portion of the report: description of the events leading 
to the use of force; description of the subject’s resistance; 
description of the use of force by police to overcome 
resistance, including a description of all empty hand controls 
used by the officer; supervisor’s evaluation of the propriety of 
the initial contact and the propriety of the use of force; 
supervisor’s evaluation of a foot pursuit if applicable. 

Force using any physical strike or 
instrumental contact with a person; 
chemical irritant; OC aerosol 
canister, OC blast grenade, 
deployment of a canine resulting in 
a bite; beanbag shotgun and 40mm 
foam rounds; TASER; or 
PepperBall. 

Supervisors will be called to the scene and conduct a 
supervisory investigation including the supervisor’s narrative 
description of the events preceding the use of force, the 
officer(s)’ description of events, and digital audio recorded 
statements of all witnesses including the officer(s), subject(s), 
medical treating personnel (if practicable), and third-parties.  
For chemical irritant use and TASER deployment, digitally 
recorded statements are only required if the use occurs after 
handcuffing.  

PSS will respond to the scene to investigate.  CIS will respond 
for all shots fired and death investigations involving police, and 
for other incidents at the direction of the Bureau commander.  

All deadly and serious uses of force 
and canine bites that cause serious 
injury or hospital admission.  This 
includes, but may not be limited to: 
•  Action that directly or indirectly 
results in a person being 
seriously injured, admitted to a 
hospital, or killed (including 
injuries that are self-inflicted) 
•  All head strikes with an impact 

•  All uses of a carotid/choke hold 

weapon 

 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

17 

12.545 

1. 

The investigating supervisor will promptly notify the district/section/unit OIC 
(officer in charge), or the Night Inspector, if on duty.  The use of force will not be 
investigated by any officer who used force or chemical irritant, whose conduct 
led to an injury to a prisoner, or who authorized the conduct that led to the 
reportable incident. 

a. 

If none of the above are on duty, ensure the next command officer who 
comes on duty is notified. 

b.  Contact the PSS Commander, the CIS Commander, and the officer's 

district/section/unit commander for all deadly/serious uses of force and all 
canine bites which cause serious injury or hospital admission. 

c.  Contact the PSS Commander and the officer's district/section/unit 

commander if more than the necessary amount of force appears to have 
been used, or the injuries are inconsistent with the reported force. 

2. 

The supervisor will conduct a preliminary fact finding interview of witnesses and 
officers at the scene and search for evidentiary materials.  The supervisor will 
then conduct a thorough investigation and evaluate the propriety of the action 
taken.  The supervisor or command officer investigating the incident must be of 
at least the next higher rank than the officer(s) who used force.  The only 
exception is when a lieutenant uses force and there is no captain or above 
working, but an acting Night Inspector (lieutenant) is available.  In this case, the 
acting Night Inspector can conduct the investigation. 

a.  Other than a use of chemical irritant or TASER, a supervisor will ensure 
neutral officers transport the prisoner to the appropriate facility, if 
applicable. 

1)  Officers may remove a prisoner to a safe location to prevent an 

escalation of the incident. 

b.  Detail supervisors will be responsible for the investigation of a use of force 

involving officers under their supervision. 

c. 

A supervisor in the district where the force occurred will investigate and 
report incidents when the officer is off-duty. 

1) 

If a use of force occurs outside the city limits, a supervisor from the 
closest district will investigate the incident. 

d. 

If an officer is involved in a use of force outside a 50-mile radius of the 
city, the officer will promptly contact an ECC supervisor and make a 
notification of the use of force.  The officer will leave a phone number 
where he/she can be contacted. 

1)  ECC will contact the involved officer's assigned district/section/unit 

commander and notify him/her of the incident. 

2) 

The district/section/unit commander will call the officer to determine 
the correct course of action. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

18 

12.545 

3.  After the preliminary fact finding interview, utilize a digital recorder to record all 
further interviews with the arrested, civilian witnesses, and police officer 
witnesses in incidents involving canine bites or the physical use of force.  Do 
not utilize cassette tape recordings for interviews.  Cassette tapes are no longer 
authorized.  Attach the interview digital recording(s) to the Use of Force 
Investigation File in the ETS system. 

a. 

The digitally recorded interview will contain the following information: 

1)  Date, time, and location of interview. 

2) 

Interviewer's name and title. 

3)  Reason for the interview, e.g., "I am investigating the arrest of John 

Doe which took place at 1012 Ludlow Avenue." 

4) 

Identity of the person interviewed. 

5)  Explanation of what happened with specific reference to how the 
injury occurred.  Do not ask leading or suggestive questions. 

b. 

If more information is needed, ask the appropriate questions. 

c.  Upon completion, conclude the digitally recorded interview by identifying 
yourself, the person interviewed, and state the time, e.g., "This is 
Sergeant Dees concluding this interview with Mr. John Doe.  The time is 
2000 hours." 

4. 

The investigating supervisor will interview and examine the subject of the use of 
force.  Be sure the arrested is fully aware of the supervisor's rank and purpose 
of the interview.  The supervisor is responsible for examining the subject for any 
injuries and is responsible to ensure any necessary medical attention is 
secured. 

a. 

The investigating supervisor will take photographs of the subject.  Take 
specific photos of any injury, or claimed injury, to the subject. 

1) 

The investigating supervisor will record his/her name, badge 
number, date, time and name of the subject on the photographs.  
Attach the photographs to the original ETS report. 

a)  Original photographs will be filed at the district/section of origin. 

b.  Anytime the subject of a use of force goes to a hospital, a supervisor will 

respond and: 

1)  Ask permission of the medical staff to view the arrested to note the 

total extent of the injuries. 

2) 

3) 

Interview the arrested, digitally recording the interview. 

Interview the treating physician and include the diagnosis in the 
report.  Utilize a digital recorder while conducting the interview if the 
physician permits it. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

19 

12.545 

a) 

If the treating physician cannot release a diagnosis of the 
subject’s injuries due to doctor-patient confidentiality, the 
supervisor will note it in the report. 

4) 

If possible, obtain a hospital and Department release for medical 
records from the arrested.  Attach the release to the original 
investigative report in the ETS file.  Original medical release forms 
will be filed at the district/section/unit of origin. 

5)  Note on the Form 18F, Supervisor’s Use of Force Investigation 

Report, if the subject refuses treatment at the hospital. 

5. 

If the arrested is seriously injured or admitted to a hospital, promptly notify the 
district/section/unit commander of the involved officer, the PSS Commander, 
the CIS Commander, and the Night Inspector /Duty Officer, if on duty. 

a. 

The Homicide Unit and PSS will conduct an investigation with the 
assistance of the effected district/section/unit when the serious injury is a 
result of the use of force. 

1) 

The district/section/unit commander will coordinate the investigation 
in the absence of a PSS investigator. 

a) 

The CIS and PSS Commanders will forward all findings and 
reports to the Police Chief’s Office through command channels. 

b)  When PSS or the Homicide Unit is conducting the use of force 
investigation, the unit responsible for the primary investigation 
will complete a Form 18F. 

b. 

c. 

If the arrested is admitted to a hospital for psychiatric evaluation only, 
without serious injury (PES, etc.), the above notifications are not required. 

If the arrested remains at a hospital for observation purposes as the result 
of the use of force, notify the affected Assistant Police Chief and the Night 
Inspector/Duty Officer, who will determine whether CIS and PSS will be 
notified. 

6. 

The investigating supervisor will complete an appropriate Form 18F in ETS. 
The investigating supervisor will not need to create a hard copy Use of Force 
Case Jacket if all documentation can be downloaded into the ETS file 
electronically, e.g. digital interviews, pictures, and other scanned documents.  
Supervisors will note in the header of the ETS file no hard copy jacket has been 
created, e.g. “Form 18TBFP – John Jones – NO JACKET.” 

a.  A hard copy Use of Force Case Jacket will be necessary if there is a copy 
of a video disc or other file that cannot be downloaded electronically in 
ETS because of its size, e.g. MVR video.  Hard copy Use of Force Case 
Jackets will be routed through the chain of command. 

b.  Ensure all blocks are completed.  Multiple blocks may be checked, as 

applicable, in the following defined categories: 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

20 

12.545 

•  Ceased All Movement:  Subject fails to comply with verbal commands 

from an officer to submit to arrest and abruptly stops all movement.  This is 
often a behavioral cue the subject is forming a plan to resist the officer. 

•  Conspicuously Ignoring:  Subject fails to comply with verbal commands 
from an officer to submit to arrest and fails to respond to questions or 
orders, refuses to acknowledge the officer’s presence, engages in other 
activities, or attempts to leave the area. 

•  Resistive Tension:  Subject fails to comply with verbal commands from an 

officer to submit to arrest and makes their body rigid by tensing the 
muscles.  This rigidity can be full body resistance or a particular body part.  
The goal of the action is to prevent control by means of superior strength. 

•  Exaggerated Movement:  Subject fails to comply with verbal commands 
from an officer to submit to arrest and exhibits rapid body movements, 
such as flailing of the arms, excited pacing, bouncing or similar actions.  
Actions are often behavioral cues indicating preparation for physical 
exertion to avoid having the officer take control. 

•  Excessive Emotional Tension:  Subject fails to comply with verbal 

commands from an officer to submit to arrest and is belligerent, yelling or 
argumentative towards the officer or another person.  Actions are often 
behavioral cues indicating preparation for physical exertion to avoid having 
the officer take control. 

•  Combative/Assaultive:  Subject fails to comply with verbal commands 

from an officer to submit to arrest and attempts, threatens or succeeds in 
physically assaulting an officer or another person by means of body 
weapons (hands, feet, kicks, punches, elbow strikes, spitting, biting, etc.). 

•  Armed:  Subject fails to comply with verbal commands from an officer to 
submit to arrest and displays or claims to possess a weapon, threatens to 
obtain or use a weapon, makes overt actions consistent with being armed, 
or is reported to be armed. 

c. 

d. 

Include concise statements addressing corroboration or contradiction for 
each witness. 

Type a brief summary of the use of force incident on the Form 18 and 
include the following information: 

1)  Decision to arrest, including the basis for the stop and seizure. 

2)  How the subject resisted arrest. 

3)  Subject’s resistive behavior. 

4)  Officer’s tactics and actions to counter resistance/assault. 

5) 

The supervisor’s analysis of the propriety of the officer’s use of force. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

21 

12.545 

6)  A statement indicating the subject of the use of force was 

interviewed as part of the investigation.  Include the identity of the 
supervisor who conducted the interview. 

7. 

If while investigating a use of force, an individual alleges excessive force, the 
investigating supervisor will complete Form 648, Citizen Complaint or 
Information, and include it in the use of force case folder.  The supervisor will 
investigate the complaint thoroughly while all participants and witnesses are 
present.  If the original use of force does not require the investigation to be 
digitally recorded, but there is an excessive force allegation in conjunction with 
the use of force, the supervisor will digitally record the interview of the subject 
of the use of force.  This is only required when an excessive force complaint 
accompanies a use of force investigation.  The main focus of the interview 
should be the complaint allegation, not the use of force.  Refer to Procedure 
15.100, Citizen Complaints and Reports of Favorable Police Conduct, for 
routing of the form. 

8. 

The investigating supervisor will ensure the completion of and sign the Form 
527, Arrest and Investigation Report, and Form 527A, Case and Bond 
Information Sheet, listing the prisoner's physical condition.  The Form 527 will 
accompany the prisoner to Central Intake at the Hamilton County Justice 
Center (HCJC). 

9. 

Form 18F will be workflowed to the assigned district/section/unit commander 
through the chain of command. 

a.  Upon workflowing Form 18F, the investigating supervisor will use the “Add 

Notification” function to include the following units: 

1)  Professional Standards Section 

2) 

Inspections Unit 

3)  Patrol Administration 

b. 

If the Form 18F is not complete and the investigating supervisor needs to 
retain the document to complete their investigation, they should workflow 
the document to themselves while still notifying the above listed units by 
the “Add Notification” function.  Do not use the “Add Recipient” function. 

10.  The district/section/unit commander will review the original report and complete 
a use of force supplement, which will be attached to the appropriate use of 
force case folder in ETS.  Within seven days, the district/section/unit 
commander will forward the digitally recorded statements and photos to the 
Police Chief's Office through the affected Assistant Police Chief in a sealed 
envelope. 

11. 

If an additional investigation is required, note it on the supplement. 

12.  The investigating supervisor will make a blotter entry describing the incident 

and action taken. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

22 

12.545 

13.  Following each use of force investigation conducted by a supervising officer, an 

officer at the rank of lieutenant or higher will review the investigation, identify 
any discrepancies, and require the supervising officer who conducted the 
investigation to correct any such deficiencies.  Appropriate non-disciplinary 
corrective action and/or disciplinary action will be taken when a supervising 
officer fails to conduct a thorough investigation or fails to properly adjudicate an 
incident, or when a reviewing lieutenant neglects to recommend appropriate 
corrective action. 

I. 

Reporting Process for Use of TASER /Beanbag Shotgun /40mm Foam Round 
/PepperBall Launcher 

1.  Supervisors must complete a detailed Form 18TBFP, Use of TASER/ 

Beanbag/40mm Foam Round/PepperBall, in ETS after an officer uses one of 
the above tools.  Form 18TBFP must be completed whether or not an individual 
is struck with a beanbag, 40mm foam round, PepperBall round, or TASER barb. 

a.  After each TASER deployment, the investigating supervisor will retrieve 
the data stored on the TASER data chip, print out the TASER data port 
download and record the necessary information on the Form 18TBFP.  
The supervisor will then scan the data port download sheet into the 
computer and attach it to the appropriate use of force case folder in ETS. 

1)  Report any accidental discharges on a Form 17 and route via the 

chain of command. 

2)  Report any discharges at an animal on a Form 18A, Weapons 
Discharge at an Animal, and route via the chain of command. 

b.  Workflow the report to the district/section/unit commander.  After review, 

the district/section/unit commander shall workflow the original report to 
Inspections Unit through the affected Assistant Police Chief 

1)  When workflowing the Form 18TBFP, use the “Add Notification” 

function for the following units: 

a) 

Inspections Unit 

b)  Patrol Administration 

c.  No supplementary report is necessary unless requested by the Police 

Chief or an Assistant Police Chief. 

d. 

The relief officer in charge is responsible for providing a media voice mail, 
as soon as possible after the incident, describing the incident and the use 
of the TASER/beanbag shotgun/40mm foam round/PepperBall launcher. 

2. 

The investigating supervisor will make a blotter entry describing the incident 
and action taken. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

23 

12.545 

J.  Reporting and Notification Process for an Injury to Prisoner 

1.  Supervisors will complete a Form 18I, Injury to Prisoner, in ETS for any injury to 

the arrested not the result of the use of force, while under or just prior to police 
control, and as a result of police activity, including the ingestion of contraband. 

a. 

b. 

If the arrested has ingested contraband which results in either seizures, 
convulsions, loss of consciousness, or other serious medical conditions; 
or if the arrested remains at a hospital for observation purposes, or is 
admitted to a hospital, promptly notify the affected Assistant Police Chief 
and the Night Inspector/Duty Officer who will determine whether CIS and 
PSS will be notified. 

In the event of an incident wherein the underlying police use of force 
meets the threshold that requires an officer to complete a Form 18NC, 
Noncompliant Suspect/Arrestee Report, to document the incident, and the 
subject is injured or complains of injury as a result of the force, the 
incident will be investigated by a supervisor as an injury to prisoner and 
documented on a Form 18I. 

1) 

If a serious injury occurs, follow the notification process as outlined 
in Section H.5. of this procedure. 

2. 

The narrative section of the Form 18I will be brief and concise, containing the 
information in the Reporting a Use of Force Chart (see Section H).  If the 
incident also involved the use of chemical irritant, the narrative must address 
the circumstances warranting chemical irritant usage as well as the 
circumstances of the injury. 

3.  Workflow the Form 18I to the district/section/unit commander through the chain 

of command; attach copies of any original documents, photographs, or digital 
recordings to the ETS folder.  Original documents will be filed at the 
district/section/unit of origin. 

a.  When workflowing the Form 18I, “Add Notification” for the following units: 

1) 

Inspections Unit. 

2)  Patrol Administration 

b. 

The district/section/unit commander will evaluate the propriety of the initial 
contact and the use of force and will note his findings on the Form 18I. 

4. 

The investigating supervisor will make a blotter entry describing the incident 
and action taken. 

K.  Reporting Process for Use of Chemical Irritant, OC Aerosol Canister and OC Blast 

Grenade. 

1.  Supervisors will complete Form 18CI in ETS when reporting the use of 

chemical irritant, OC aerosol canister, and OC blast grenade. 

a.  Workflow the Form 18CI to the district/section/unit commander through 

the chain of command. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

24 

1)  Upon workflowing the Form 18CI, use the “Add Notification” function 

12.545 

for the following units: 

a) 

Inspections Unit 

b)  Patrol Administration 

b. 

The investigating supervisor will make a blotter entry describing the 
incident and action taken. 

2.  After review, the district/section/unit commander shall workflow the report to 

Inspections Unit through the affected Assistant Police Chief. 

L.  Priority of Forms 

1. 

2. 

If more than one act by an individual occurs, only one report is needed, e.g., 
use of force and a use of beanbag shotgun. 

Listed below is the order in which a report is made, with “a.” being the highest 
priority: 

a.  Use of Force 

1) 

Include TASER /Beanbag Shotgun /40mm Foam Round /PepperBall 
/OC aerosol canister /OC blast grenade information, if applicable. 

2) 

Include canine information, if applicable. 

b. 

TASER /Beanbag Shotgun /40mm Foam Round /PepperBall. 

1) 

Include canine information, if applicable. 

c.  Canine 

d. 

Injury to Prisoner 

e.  Chemical Irritant 

f. 

Noncompliant Suspect/Arrestee Report 

M.  Documentation Needed for Each Form 

1. 

Form 18F, Supervisor’s Use of Force Investigation Report: 

 

a.  Digitally recorded statement(s) 

b.  Photos 

c. 

Form 527, Arrest and Investigation Report 

d.  Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) Incident History 

e.  Medical release, if treated 

f. 

Summary of doctor’s diagnosis, if treated 

g.  Copy of DVR disc/file if incident is captured on video 

2. 

Form 18TBFP, Use of TASER/Beanbag/40mm Foam Round/PepperBall: 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

25 

a.  Digitally recorded statement(s) (TASER deployment is exempt from this 

requirement unless the subject was handcuffed at the time of use, or 
unless there is a complaint of excessive force in conjunction with the use 
of force investigation) 

12.545 

b.  Photos 

c. 

Form 527, Arrest and Investigation Report 

d.  Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) Incident History 

e.  Medical release, if treated 

f. 

g. 

Summary of doctor’s diagnosis, if treated 

TASER data port download, if applicable 

h.  Copy of DVR disc/file if incident is captured on video 

3. 

Form 18C, Use of Canine: 

a.  Digitally recorded statement(s) 

b.  Photos 

c. 

Form 527, Arrest and Investigation Report 

d.  Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) Incident History 

e.  Medical release, if treated 

f. 

Summary of doctor’s diagnosis, if treated 

g.  Copy of DVR disc/file if incident is captured on video 

4. 

Form 18CI, Use of Chemical Irritant: 

a.  Short narrative 

b. 

Form 527, Arrest and Investigation Report 

c.  Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) Incident History 

d.  Digitally recorded statement(s) (Only if the subject was handcuffed at the 

time or there is an excessive force complaint in conjunction with the use of 
force investigation.) 

e.  Copy of DVR disc/file if incident is captured on video. 

5. 

Form 18I, Injury to Prisoner: 

a.  Photos 

b. 

Form 527, Arrest and Investigation Report 

c.  Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) Incident History 

d.  Digitally recorded statement(s) (Only if there is an excessive force 
allegation in conjunction with the use of force investigation.) 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

26 

e.  Brief, concise narrative to include information from the Reporting Use of 

Force Chart (see Section H.) 

f.  Medical release, if treated 

12.545 

g.  Summary of doctor’s diagnosis, if treated 

h.  Copy of DVR disc/file if incident is captured on video 

6. 

Form 18NC, Noncompliant Suspect/Arrestee Report: 

a.  Brief, concise narrative of resistance met and force used 

b. 

Form 527, Arrest and Investigation Report 

c.  Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) Incident History 

d.  Supervisory review before end of tour 

e.  Copy for district files, original to Inspections Unit  

f. 

Digitally recorded statement(s) (Only if there is an excessive force 
allegation in conjunction with the use of force investigation.) 

g.  Copy of DVR disc/file if incident is captured on video 

7.  After attaching a copy to the ETS file, all original documents, photos, digital 
recordings, and copies of DVR disc/ will be filed at the district/section/unit of 
origin. 

N.  Responsibilities of Inspections Unit to Insure Policy and Procedure Compliance and 

Implementation: 

1. 

Inspections Unit will review, evaluate in writing, and submit for the Police 
Chief’s approval all supervisor reported use of force, use of beanbag shotgun, 
40mm foam round, Auto-Lock baton, and all canine bites (except those causing 
serious injury or hospital admission). 

a. 

Inspections Unit is exempt from reviewing use of force cases assigned to 
the Use of Force Review Board. 

2. 

Inspections Unit will review, evaluate, and submit for the Police Chief’s approval 
all investigations of TASER or chemical irritant use on handcuffed individuals. 

3. 

Inspections Unit will review all Forms 18NC for trends and training issues. 

Revised 09/17/15, Replaces 05/14/15 

27 

