 
 

 

Colorado Springs Police Department  
General Order 705  

Section 7:  Use of Force – Force, Detention, and Arrest  

Active Date: 2/3/2017 
Supersedes Date: 6/17/2013 
 

.01   Purpose 
 
The purpose of this policy is to provide officers with guidelines for the lawful use of deadly and 
less lethal force.  

.02   Cross Reference 
 
GO 815, Deadly Force Investigations  
GO 710, Reporting Use of Force 
GO 1917, Early Intervention Program 
 
.03   Discussion 
 
Police officers are given the unique right to use force against others, even deadly force, for 
legitimate law enforcement purposes. The right to use force carries with it a heavy responsibility 
not to abuse it. Police agencies have an obligation to provide their employees with the policies, 
training, and tools necessary to accomplish their mission. 

The Colorado Springs Police Department places a high value on resolving confrontations, when 
practical, with less force than the maximum that may be allowed by law. While the ultimate 
objective of every law enforcement encounter is to avoid or minimize injury, nothing in this 
policy requires an officer to retreat or be exposed to possible physical injury before applying 
reasonable force.  
 
This policy should not be construed as creating a higher legal standard of safety or care, in an 
evidentiary sense, with respect to third-party claims. Violations of this directive will form the 
basis for Departmental administrative sanctions only. Violations of law will form the basis for 
civil and criminal sanctions in a recognized judicial setting.  
.04   Policy 
 
It is the policy of the Colorado Springs Police Department that officers use only the force that is 
reasonably necessary to effectively bring an incident under control. A use of force must be 
objectively reasonable. The officer must only use that force which a reasonably prudent officer 
would use under the same or similar circumstances. When feasible prior to the use of force, an 

1 

 
 

 

officer shall identify himself or herself as a law enforcement officer and warn of his/her intent to 
use force.  

 
.05   Definitions 

DEADLY FORCE: Any use of force that creates a substantial risk of causing death or serious 
bodily injury.  

LESS LETHAL USE OF FORCE: Any use of force other than that which is considered deadly 
force.   
 
FIREARM:  Lethal firearms excluding those dedicated to deploy less-lethal munitions  
 
OBJECTIVELY REASONABLE FORCE: This is the term created by the Courts as the standard 
by which officers’ actions will be evaluated in use of force situations (see Graham v. Connor). 
This term means the force that an objective, trained, and competent peace officer, faced with 
similar facts and circumstances, would consider necessary and reasonable to subdue an attacker, 
overcome resistance, effect custody, or gain compliance with a lawful order. The determination 
of reasonableness must be based on the totality of the circumstances and must include a 
consideration that officers are often forced to make split second decisions in circumstances 
which are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving. The determination of reasonableness is not 
based on the 20/20 vision of hindsight. Some of the factors evaluated in the application of the 
term “objectively reasonable” include: the severity of the crime at issue, whether the suspect 
poses an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or others, and whether s/he is actively 
resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flight.  

SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: "Serious bodily injury," as defined in CRS § 18-1-901 (3) (p), 
means bodily injury which, either at the time of the actual injury or at a later time, involves a 
substantial risk of death, a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, a substantial risk 
of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body, or breaks, 
fractures, or burns of second or third degree. 

WARNING SHOT: An intentional discharge of a firearm into the air, ground, or an inanimate 
object with the intent of announcing the capability or willingness to apply deadly force. 

.10   Use of Deadly Force 

A.  An officer is authorized to use deadly force when the officer reasonably believes it is 

necessary: 
a.  To protect the officer or others from what is reasonably believed to be the use or 

b.  To effect an arrest or to prevent the escape from custody of a person whom the officer 

imminent use of deadly physical force; or 
 

reasonably believes: 

2 

 
 

 

 

i.  Has committed or attempted to commit a felony involving the use or 

threatened use of a deadly weapon; or 

ii.  Is attempting to escape by the use of a deadly weapon; or  
iii.  Otherwise indicates, except through a motor vehicle violation, that 

s/he is likely to endanger human life or to inflict serious bodily injury 
to another unless apprehended without delay.  (CRS § 18-1-707(2)) 

In all situations in which deadly force is used against a person, a thorough investigation shall be 
conducted in accordance with GO 815, Deadly Force Investigations.  

.20    Restrictions on Firearms as Deadly 
Force 

2.  Firearms shall not be discharged from a moving vehicle, except in cases of extreme 

1.  Warning shots are prohibited. 

 

emergency. 
 

person may be injured. 
 

3.  Officers should use extreme caution in discharging a firearm when it appears an innocent 

4.  Firearms may only be discharged at a moving vehicle if the officer is authorized to use 

deadly force pursuant to section .10 of this policy.  
 
The moving vehicle itself shall not presumptively constitute a threat that justifies an 
officer's use of deadly force. An officer threatened by an on-coming vehicle shall move 
out of its path instead of discharging a firearm at it or any of its occupants, unless there is 
no way to move out of the path of the on-coming vehicle.  

.30 Use of Less Lethal Force 

Where deadly force is not authorized, officers shall use only the amount of force that is 
objectively reasonable to bring an incident under control. Officers are authorized to use less 
lethal force techniques when one or more of the following apply: 

a.  To protect the officer or others from physical harm. 
b.  To restrain or subdue a resistant individual. 
c.  To bring an unlawful situation safely and effectively under control.  

3 

 
 

 

.40 Factors to Consider in Use of Force 
Incidents  

Because of differences in size, strength, and specialty training among officers, different levels of 
force may be objectively reasonable for different officers in similar situations. When determining 
whether to apply force and evaluating whether an officer has used reasonable force, a number of 
factors should be taken into consideration, as time and circumstances permit.  Some of these 
factors are listed below.  This list is not inclusive of every factor that may be considered. This list 
is not prioritized, nor is it meant to imply any one factor or combination of factors should have 
greater weight than another.   

a.  Seriousness of the suspected offense or reason for contact with the individual. 
b.  Immediacy and severity of the threat to officers or others. 
c.  The conduct of the individual being confronted, as reasonably perceived by the officer at 

d.  Whether the person appears to be resisting, attempting to evade arrest by flight or is 

e.  The risk and reasonably foreseeable consequences of escape. 
f.  The apparent need for immediate control of the subject or a prompt resolution of the 

the time. 

attacking the officer. 

situation. 

g.  Whether the conduct of the individual being confronted no longer reasonably appears to 

pose an imminent threat to the officer or others.  

h.  The degree to which the subject has been effectively restrained and his/her ability to 

resist despite being restrained. 

i.  Officer and subject factors such as age, size, relative strength, skill level, injuries 

sustained, level of exhaustion or fatigue, the number of officers available vs. subjects. 

j.  The effects of drugs or alcohol. 
k.  The subject’s mental state, mental capacity, and/or physical capacity. 
l.  Proximity of weapons or dangerous improvised devices. 
m.  The availability of other options and their effectiveness. 
n.  Training and experience of the officer. 
o.  Potential for injury to officers, suspects, and others. 
p.  Prior contacts with the subject or awareness of any propensity for violence. 
q.  Any other exigent circumstances. 

.50 Medical Considerations 
 
Medical attention shall be obtained for any person who exhibits signs of physical distress, who 
has sustained visible injury, expresses a complaint of injury or continuing pain, or was rendered 

4 

 
 

 

unconscious.  An individual showing signs of physical distress after an encounter should be 
continuously monitored until s/he can be medically assessed.  

Persons who exhibit extreme agitation, violent irrational behavior accompanied by profuse 
sweating, extraordinary strength beyond their physical characteristics, and imperviousness to 
pain (sometimes called “excited delirium”), or who require a protracted physical encounter with 
multiple officers to be brought under control, may be at an increased risk of sudden death. Calls 
involving these persons should be considered medical emergencies.  Officers who reasonably 
suspect a medical emergency should request medical assistance as soon as practicable.  

.60 Duty to Intercede and Report 

Any officer present and observing another officer using force that is beyond that which is 
objectively reasonable under the circumstances shall, when in a position to do so, intercede to 
prevent the use of unreasonable force. An officer who observes another employee use force that 
exceeds the degree of force permitted by law must promptly report these observations to a 
supervisor. (CRS § 18-8-802) 
 
.70 Use of Force Training 
 

1.  All officers shall receive training, at least annually, on CSPD’s use of force policies and 

related case law updates. 
 

2.  CSPD shall provide regular and periodic training designed to do the following: 

a.  Reinforce the importance of de-escalation techniques;  
b.  Simulate shooting situations and conditions; and 
c.  Enhance officers’ discretion and judgment in using less-lethal and deadly force in 

accordance with this policy.   
 

Training Academy. 

3.  All use of force training shall be documented and such documentation maintained by the 

5 

