          D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T

M A N U A L  

Effective Date 
8/6/2014 

Review Date 
Annually 

Directive Number 
 

Series  
300 Support Services 
Chapter   
304 – Use of Force 
Reviewing Office 
Chief of Police  
References 
 

304.2 

 

 

 New Directive 
 Revised 

USE OF FORCE 

304.2 - 1  PURPOSE 
To establish policy, guidelines and limitations for the Detroit Police Department (DPD) 
concerning the appropriate and acceptable use of deadly and less lethal force.     

304.2 - 2  POLICY 
An  improper  use  of  authority  and/or  excessive  or  unjustified  use  of  force  undermine 
the legitimacy of an officer’s authority and hinders the department’s ability to provide 
effective  law  enforcement  services  to  the  community.    Officers  who  use  excessive 
force or an unauthorized use of force shall be subjected to discipline, possible criminal 
prosecution, and/or civil liability.  Use of force is only authorized when it is objectively 
reasonable and for a lawful purpose. 
 
Research  indicates  that  one  of  the  most  common  factors  found  in  both  police 
excessive  or  unjustified  use  of  force,  and  officer  injuries  and  fatalities  during  force 
encounters,  is  an  officer’s  perceived  compulsion  to  press  forward  rather  than  to 
disengage (e.g., “back off”) and explore other options.  The most appropriate response 
choice to a situation often involves de-escalation, disengagement, area containment, 
in 
surveillance,  waiting  out  a  subject,  summoning  reinforcements,  or  calling 
specialized  commands.    Following  any  use  of  force  resulting  in  a  citizen’s  injury, 
officers  shall  notify  a  supervisor  and  ensure  that  appropriate  medical  aid  and/or 
emergency medical service is rendered as soon as possible. 
 
304.2 - 3  Definitions  
304.2 - 3.1  Command Investigation 
Means an investigation conducted by a Detroit Police Department supervisor.   
 
304.2 - 3.2  Control 
Control is the ability to command or direct with or without voluntary compliance. Officers 
shall  control  with  the  subject's  consent,  if  possible,  but  force  the  subject  to  comply  if 
necessary. 
 
304.2 - 3.3  Critical Discharge of a Firearm 
Each discharge of a firearm by an officer with the exception of range and training 
discharges and discharges at animals.  
  
 

2014 

Page 1 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 
304.2 - 3.4  Discipline   
A written reprimand, suspension, demotion or dismissal. 
  
304.2 - 3.5  Escorting 
The use of light physical pressure to guide a person, or keep a person in place.  
  
304.2 - 3.6  Force  
The  term  “force”  means  the  following  actions  by  an  officer:    any  physical  strike  or 
instrumental  contact  with  a  person;  any  intentional  attempted  physical  strike  or 
instrumental contact that does not take effect; or any significant physical contact that 
restricts the movement of a person.  The term includes the discharge of a firearm; the 
use  of  chemical  spray,  chokeholds  or  hard  hands;  the  taking  of  a  subject  to  the 
ground;  or  the  deployment  of  a  canine.    The  term  does  not  include  escorting  or 
handcuffing  a  person  with  no  or  minimal  resistance.    Use  of  force  is  lawful  if  it  is 
objectively reasonable under the circumstances, and the minimum amount of force 
that is necessary to affect an arrest or protect the officer or other person is used.  
 
304.2 - 3.7  Hard Hands 
Using physical pressure to force a person against an object or the ground, or the use 
of physical strength or skill that causes pain or leaves a mark.  
  
304.2 - 3.8 
An imminent threat is an officer’s reasonable perception of impending danger of death 
or  serious  injury  from  any  action  or  outcome  that  may  occur  during  an  encounter. 
Thus, a subject may pose an imminent or impending danger even if he or she is not at 
that  very  moment  pointing  a  weapon  at  the  officer.  For  example,  he  or  she  has  a 
weapon within reach or is running for cover carrying a weapon or running to a place 
where the officer has reason to believe a weapon is available.  
 
304.2 - 3.9 
Any impairment of physical condition or pain. 
  
304.2 - 3.10  Less Lethal Force 
Any force used by an officer that would not reasonably be expected to cause death.   
    
304.2 - 3.11  Objectively Reasonable 
In  determining  the  necessity  for  force  and  the  appropriate  level  of  force,  officers  shall 
evaluate each situation in light of the known circumstances, including, but not limited to, 
the seriousness of the crime, the level of threat or resistance presented by the subject, and 
the danger to the community. 

Imminent Threat  

Injury 

304.2 - 3.12  Detainee Injury 
An injury or complaint of injury that occurs in the course of taking or after an individual was 
taken into DPD custody that is not attributed to a use of force by a DPD employee. 

2014 

Page 2 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 
304.2 - 3.13  Proper Use of Force Decision Making 
The use of reasonable force including proper tactics and de-escalation techniques.  
  
304.2 - 3.14  Serious Bodily Injury 
Serious bodily injury is any injury that involves any of the following conditions: a loss of 
consciousness; extreme physical pain; disfigurement; prolonged loss or impairment of 
the function of a body part or organ; or a substantial risk of death. 
 
304.2 - 3.15  Serious Use of Force 
Any action by an officer that involves: the use of deadly force, including all critical firearm 
discharges;  a  use  of  force  in  which  the  person  suffers  serious  bodily  injury  or  requires 
hospital  admission;  a  canine  bite;  and  the  use  of  chemical  spray  against  a  restrained 
person. 
 
304.2 - 4  Authorization and Limitations 
304.2 - 4.1  Less Lethal Force 
1.  Sworn  members  are  authorized  to  use  DPD  approved  less  lethal  use  of  force 

techniques and DPD issued equipment where necessary to:     
a. Protect the officer or another person from physical harm; 
b. Make a lawful arrest when a subject offers resistance; 
c. Stop potentially dangerous and/or criminal behavior; or 
d. Protect subjects from injuring themselves.  

2.  Where  less  lethal  force  is  authorized,  members  shall  assess  the  incident  to 
determine which less lethal technique or weapon will best de-escalate the incident 
and bring the situation under control in a safe manner.  

3.  Use  of  force  restraints  and/or  weapons  shall  never  be  used  as  punishment  or 

retaliation. 

 
304.2 - 4.2  Deadly Force  
1.  Use of deadly force is only authorized:   

a. Against  a  subject  who  poses  an  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  bodily 
injury to the officers or others, and only when bystanders are not in jeopardy;   
b. To  prevent  a  subject’s  escape  from  a  violent  felony  crime  and  only  if  the 
officer  has  probable  cause  to  believe  that  the  subject  poses  a  continuing 
threat  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  to  anyone  should  he  or  she 
successfully escape, Tennessee v. Garner, 471 U.S.1, 85 (1985).  

2.  Deadly  force  is  not  authorized  if  less  lethal  force  could  reasonably  be  used  to 
prevent the escape of a dangerous fleeing subject, or a subject fleeing from a violent 
felony crime. 

3.  If  feasible,  officers  shall  identify  themselves  and  state  their  intention  to  shoot 

before using a firearm. 

4.  A strike to the head of any person with an instrument constitutes a use of deadly 

5.  In addition to the above, the DPD further limits the use of deadly force to effect the 

Page 3 of 10 

force. 

2014 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 

arrest or to prevent the escape of a fleeing felon to the following felonies, and only 
if the officer has probable cause to believe the fleeing felon will pose a significant 
threat of death or serious physical injury to the officer or others should he or she 
successfully escape:  

a. Murder or attempted murder; 
b. Assault with intent to commit murder; 
c. Criminal sexual conduct, first and third degree; 
d. Armed robbery or attempted armed robbery, and 
e. Assaults that result in life-threatening bodily injury. 

  
304.2 - 4.3  Prohibited Holds 
The following neck restraints are prohibited except where deadly force is authorized:  
1. Carotid submission hold;   
2. A hold which interrupts the blood’s flow to the brain; 
3. A “sleeper hold” that can result in a person losing consciousness and/or death; 
4. Bent arm submission hold/Hammer lock carotid hold.  This hold restricts airflow to 

the trachea and can result in a loss of consciousness and/or death; and 

5. All other chokeholds. 

 

themselves. 

304.2 - 4.4  Unauthorized Use of Deadly Force  
1. Deadly force shall not be used against persons whose conduct is injurious only to 

2. Warning shots are strictly prohibited.   
3. Under no circumstances can shooting a firearm be justified to make an arrest for a 

misdemeanor charge or to apprehend a person fleeing from such a charge.  

4. An officer shall not shoot a firearm in an attempt to apprehend a person merely on 
suspicion that a crime has occurred, or if there is only a suspicion that the person 
being  pursued  committed  the  crime,  regardless  of  the  severity  of  the  crime.    An 
officer  shall  either  have  witnessed  the  crime,  or  shall  have  probable  cause  to 
believe that the person committed an offense that allows using deadly force. 

 
304.2 - 4.5  Firing at a Moving Motor Vehicle 
1.  Firearms shall not be discharged at a moving vehicle unless a person in the vehicle is 
immediately  threatening  the  officer  or  another  person  with  deadly  force  or  serious 
bodily injury.  

 

Officers shall not knowingly place themselves into the path of a moving vehicle or 
into the likely path of a vehicle that is currently stopped but is under the immediate 
control of a driver. When feasible, officers should attempt to move out of the path 
of  any  moving  vehicle  to  a  position  of  cover.    Officers  shall  not  discharge  their 
weapon except in instances where the officer’s life or life of others is in immediate 
peril and there is no reasonable or apparent means of avoiding the threat. 
 
Shooting  at  moving  vehicles  is  generally  not  an  effective  means  of  immediately 
halting  the  progress  of  a  closely  approaching  vehicle.    Additionally,  such  action 

2014 

Page 4 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 

frequently produces unintended consequences.   
 
A moving vehicle may become an uncontrolled deadly weapon that could seriously 
injure or kill the occupants of the vehicle and/or subjects in its path.  The potential 
harm to others in the area may outweigh the need to immediately apprehend the 
suspect.   
 
Bullets  fired  at  a  moving  vehicle  may  miss  the  intended  target  or  ricochet  and 
cause injury to officers or other innocent persons.   

 
304.2 - 4.6  Firing from a Moving Motor Vehicle 
1.  Officers must keep in mind that accuracy is adversely affected when shooting from 
a  moving  vehicle  which  increases  the  danger  to  the  public  and  therefore  officers 
shall  shoot  from  a  moving  vehicle  only  as  a  last  resort  and  when  the  safety  of 
bystanders is not jeopardized.   

 
304.2 - 4.7  Dangerous Animals  
1.  An officer may shoot a dangerous and/or rabid animal that is posing an imminent 
threat of danger to the officer or others only when bystanders are not in jeopardy. 
2.  If  the  circumstances  permit,  when  a  member  of  the  department  has  to  shoot  an 
animal  suspected of  being  afflicted  with  rabies,  the dog  shall  NOT  be  shot  in  the 
head. The carcass of the animal should be preserved for analysis of rabies. 

3.  The carcass of any animal that has been shot and that is believed to be afflicted 
with rabies shall be taken to the Animal Control Division.  Immediate refrigeration 
of the carcass is of the utmost importance in the determination of rabid content. 
4.  When an officer comes in contact with a seriously injured or dangerous animal, the 
officer shall notify the proper agency (e.g., City of Detroit Animal Control, Michigan 
Humane Society, etc.). 

5.  In any instance where a member discharges a firearm at an animal with the intent 
to  destroy,  whether  the  animal  is  hit  or  missed,  the  officer’s  supervisor  shall 
prepare a Destruction of Animal Report (DPD 669).   

 
304.2 - 5  Proper Use of Force Decision Making 
304.2 - 5.1  General 
When evaluating the force used by law enforcement, the U.S. Supreme Court, in the 
case  of  Graham  v.  Connor,  490  US  386  (1989),  made  clear  that  the  determination 
requires a commonsense pragmatic approach stating that an officer’s decision to use 
force occurs in “circumstances which are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving,” and 
that  there  is  no  universal  rule  or  “mechanical  rule”  that  can  be  applied  to  all  of  the 
various situations encountered by a law enforcement officer.     
  
304.2 - 5.2  Force Continuum 
Just as officers must be prepared to respond appropriately to rising levels of resistance, 
they must likewise be prepared to immediately de-escalate and/or disengage from the use 

2014 

Page 5 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 
of force as the subject de-escalates or comes under the officer’s control.  Often the most 
appropriate  response  option  to  a  situation  involves  de-escalation,  disengagement,  area 
containment  and/or  surveillance,  waiting  out  a  subject,  summoning  reinforcements,  or 
calling in specialized commands. 
     
It is important for officers to remember that even at its lowest level; the use of force is a 
serious responsibility. The force continuum is a model developed for illustrative purposes, 
defining the various levels of resistance and force exercised during a use of force incident. 
[Refer to Training Directive 04-3 (Use of Force Continuum)].  The continuum is based on 
the concept that as the resistive individual(s) increases the level of resistance or threat to 
the  officer,  the  officer  may  increase  the  level  of  force  necessary  to  overcome  the 
resistance and conversely de-escalate and/or disengage as compliance is attained.   The 
levels of resistance include:  
 

• 

Inactive  Resistance: 
intimidation  (non-verbal  cues 
indicating  the  subject’s  attitude,  appearance  and  physical  readiness)  and  verbal 
non-compliance (verbal responses indicating the subject’s unwillingness to comply 
with direction may include verbal threats made by the subject). 

Includes  psychological 

•  Passive Resistance:  Physical actions that do not directly prevent the member’s 

attempt of control. 

•  Active Resistance:   Means the subject is making physically evasive movements 
to defeat an officer’s attempt at control, including bracing, tensing, pulling away, or 
pushing. 

•  Active Aggression: Physical acts that are hostile, injurious, or destructive; 
•  Deadly Force:  Physical acts of aggression directed toward a member or another 

that are likely to cause serious bodily injury or death.  

 

The levels of force are:  

•  Officer Presence/Verbal Direction:  The identification of authority through the 
officer’s  presence  in  uniform,  or  by  other  means  such  as  a  badge  and 
identification card or apparel clearly identifying the member as an officer, and/or 
communication  directed  toward  controlling  the  actions  of  a  subject.    This  may 
include direction, orders or commands; 

•  Compliance  Controls:  Physical  techniques  employed  by  officers  (e.g., 
escorting, touch pressure, joint locks, etc.) and the PR-24 Collapsible Baton as 
a non-impact control device;  

•  Physical Controls:  (e.g., pain compliance, hard hands, etc.) 
• 

Intermediate Weapons:  The use of authorized less lethal weapons including 
impact weapons, chemical agents, and canines; 

•  Deadly  Force:    A  tactic  or  use  of  force  that  is  likely  to  cause  serious  bodily 

injury or death. 

 

2014 

When applying the concept of a force continuum, the totality of the circumstances involved 
in the incident must also be considered.  Officers may initiate the use of force at any level 

Page 6 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 
of  the  force  continuum  that  is  appropriate  under  the  circumstances.    However, 
circumstances  that  may  influence  an  officer  or  may  impact  an  officer’s  decision  to 
escalate or de-escalate the amount of force used include, but are not limited to: 

•  The nature of the offense; 
• 
Influence of drugs or alcohol; 
•  Presence/proximity of weapons; 
•  Officer/Subject factors (e.g., age, size, strength, etc.); 
•  The feasibility and availability of alternative responses; and/or 
•  The availability of additional officers. 
 

304.2 - 6  Training and Qualifications 
304.2 - 6.1  General  
1.  All DPD members that are authorized to carry lethal and less than lethal weapons shall 
be  issued  a  copy  of  this  department’s  Use  of  Force  Policy  (Directive  304.2),  Use  of 
Force Continuum (Training Directive 04-03) and any other policies or training directive 
that is specific to the weapon being trained on.  

2.  All  members  shall  be  trained  by  qualified  instructors  in  any  authorized  lethal  or  less 

lethal weapon they carry.   

 
304.2 - 6.2 
1.  While on and off duty, officers shall carry only weapons and ammunition authorized 

 Firearms 

and approved by this department.  

2.  Authorized  weapons  are  those  with  which  the  officer  has  qualified  and  received 
departmental  training  on  proper  and  safe  usage,  and  that  are  registered  and 
comply with department specifications. 

3.  Officers  are  required  to  attend  regular  use  of  force  training  and  qualification 
sessions for  duty  and off-duty  weapons  (bi-annually).    An  off-duty  weapon  that  is 
approved  by  DPD’s  Firearms  Training,  and  that  the  member  has  qualified  with, 
may be carried by members as a secondary weapon while on-duty. 

4.  An officer who has suffered from an illness or injury that could affect his or her use 
of  firearms  ability  shall  be  required  to  re-qualify  prior  to  returning  to  enforcement 
duties.  

  
304.2 - 6.3  Less Lethal Weapons and Methods  
1.  No department issued piece of equipment that is not designed or authorized to be 
used as a  weapon  (for  example, flashlight, prep  radio, handcuffs),  shall   be used 
as a weapon unless deadly force is authorized. 

2.  An officer is not permitted to use a less lethal weapon unless qualified in its proficient 

use as determined by Training. 

3.  Intermediate  weapons  shall  be  carried  or  used  as  issued  and  authorized  by  the 

department.  No changes, alterations, or modifications are permitted. 

4.  Officers may use weaponless defense or arrest tactics in which departmental training 

has been given to control or arrest uncooperative suspects. 

5.  The use of a police canine to search for or apprehend suspects is considered a use of 

2014 

Page 7 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 

force under this policy. [Refer to Directive 201.4 (Canine)].  

6.  Chemical Spray:  Is authorized for on-duty or off-duty use.  Members, when assigned 
to  patrol  or  investigative  duties,  shall  carry  the  device.    [Refer  to  Directive  304.3 
(Chemical Spray Device)].  

7.  PR-24:  Is  a  compliance  control  device  that  offers  a  less  lethal  method  for 
apprehending and subduing actively resisting and/or violent subjects.  Officers should 
target  a  subject’s  torso,  arms,  and  legs  (green  areas)  when  using  the  PR-24  as  an 
impact  weapon  (striking)  for  an  actively  aggressive  subject.    A  PR-24  may  also  be 
used  as  a  non-impact  control  device  (come-along  holds,  escorts,  etc.)  for  actively 
resistive subjects.  Only members trained on the PR-24 baton may be equipped and/or 
carry the PR-24 baton.  [Refer to Directive 304.4 (PR-24 Collapsible Baton)]. 

8.  Weapons  used  for  striking,  other  than  the  PR-24  side-handle  baton,  are  strictly 
prohibited.    Prohibited  weapons  include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  brass  knuckles, 
blackjacks, nunchukus, saps, slapjacks, and other sticks or clubs. 

  
304.2 - 7  Duty to Report/Render Aid 
Whenever  a  DPD  member  employs  any  use  of  force  as  defined  by  this  Directive,  such 
member shall, unless physically incapacitated: 
1.  Ensure that the subject has been properly restrained or no longer poses an immediate 

threat to the safety of officers or others; 

2.  Render first aid and summon Emergency Medical Services (EMS) if needed; and 
3.  Provide  assistance  to  persons  subjected  to  the  effects  of  a  Chemical  Spray  Device, 

including:     

a.  Immediately after spraying a suspect, officers shall be alert to any indications 
that  the  individual  needs  medical  care.    This  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to, 
breathing  difficulties,  gagging,  profuse  sweating  or  loss  of  consciousness.  
Upon observing these or other medical problems, or if the suspect requests 
medical  assistance,  the  officer  shall  immediately  summon  emergency 
medical aid;  

b.  Provide  an  opportunity  for  decontamination  to  a  sprayed  subject  within 
twenty (20) minutes of the application of the spray or the apprehension of the 
subject;  

c.  Sprayed  subject(s)  shall  be  continuously  monitored  for  signs  of  a  medical 
complaint.    If  a  person  complains  of  continued  effects  after  having  been 
decontaminated  or  they  indicate  that  they  have  a  pre-existing  medical 
condition (e.g., asthma, emphysema, bronchitis or heart ailment) that may be 
aggravated by chemical spray, the subject shall immediately be conveyed to 
Detroit Receiving Hospital (DRH) for medical treatment;  

d.  Restrained  subjects  should  be  placed  in  an  upright  or  seated  position  to 
avoid  Positional  Asphyxia  which  can  lead  to  death,  when  a  subject’s  body 
position  interferes  with  breathing.  [Refer  to  Training  Directive  05-04 
(Positional Asphyxia)].        

 

2014 

Page 8 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 
304.2 - 7.1  Use of Force Reporting   
1.  Officers shall notify their Zone Dispatcher following any use of force or a prisoner 

injury.  The Zone Dispatcher shall notify a non-involved sworn supervisor. 

2.  A  non-involved  sworn  supervisor  shall  respond  to  the  scene following  any  use  of 
force that involves a firearm discharge, a visible injury, or a complaint of injury.    
3.  A  non-involved  sworn  supervisor  shall  respond  to  all  other  uses  of  force  on  a 
priority basis.  For the purpose of this Directive a “priority basis” is defined by the 
current  availability  of  supervisors  and  the  nature  of  the  situation  (e.g.,  highly 
charged situations, agitated by-standers, potential for violence) whereas response 
to the scene may increase volatility or be impracticable.  

4.  Upon arrival at the scene, the supervisor shall interview the officer(s), canvass for 
witnesses  and  examine  the  subject(s)  for  injury,  and  ensure  that  the  subject(s) 
receives,  or  has  received,  needed  medical  attention.  No  member  shall  delay 
rendering medical attention, requesting EMS or the conveyance of any subject to a 
medical treatment facility pending the arrival of a supervisor. 

5.   In the event an injured person has been conveyed for medical treatment prior to 
the  supervisor’s  arrival  at  the  scene,  the  supervisor  shall  interview  the  subject  at 
the  medical  facility  provided  the  interview  will  not  interfere  with  the  subject’s 
medical treatment. 

6.  The  supervisor  responding  to  the  scene  shall  notify  Internal  Affairs  (IA)  of  all 
serious uses of force, uses of force that result in a visible injury, uses of force that 
a reasonable officer should have known were likely to result in injury, and uses of 
force where there is evidence of possible criminal misconduct by an officer.   

7.  Internal Affairs shall respond to the scene and investigate all incidents where there 
is  evidence  of  possible  criminal  misconduct  by  an  officer,  where  a  prisoner  dies, 
suffers  serious  bodily  injury,  or  requires  hospital  admission,  or  where  there  is  a 
serious  use  of  force.    Force  Investigation  may  delegate  all  other  use  of  force  or 
prisoner  injury  investigations  to  the  responding  supervisor  for  a  command 
investigation, if deemed appropriate by Force Investigation.   

 
304.2 - 7.2  Use of Force Report  
In all instances when officers use force, as defined in Section 3.8 of this Directive, each 
officer who has employed such force shall complete:  
1.  Any reports made necessary by the nature of the underlying incident;  
2.  Each member using force shall ensure that a declarative statement is included at the 
beginning  of  the  narrative  section  of  the  arrest  report  indicating  whether  or  not force 
was used during the incident; 

3.  Each  individual  officer  who  uses  force  in  an  incident  shall  submit  a  separate  Use  of 
Force Report (UF-002) documenting any force, any prisoner injury, and any instance in 
which an officer draws a firearm and acquires a target;   

4.  Allegation of force shall only be taken by a supervisor. (reference 201.11 Use of Force 

and Detainee Injury Reporting/Investigation); 

5.  All Use of Force Reports shall specify the actions of the subject that necessitated the 
use of force, the reasons why the officer used force, any subject complaints of injury, 
medical treatment received, or refusal of medical treatment;  

2014 

Page 9 of 10 

  D E T R O I T   P O L I C E   D E P A R T M E N T  

M A N U A L  

304.2 Use of Force  

 
6.  The Use of Force Report shall be submitted as soon as possible following the incident 

but prior to the end of the member’s tour of duty; and  

7.  All reports/forms completed as a result of an incident shall be reviewed and updated by 

a supervisor prior to the end of their tour of duty. 

 
 

Related Procedures: 
      Directive 201.11 Use of Force and Detainee Injury Reporting/Investigation) 
•  Directive 201.4 – Canine (K-9) Operations 
•  Directive 202.1 – Arrests 
•  Directive 304.1 – Firearms 
•  Directive 304.3 – Chemical Spray Device 
•  Directive 304.4 – PR-24 Collapsible Baton 
•  Training Directive 05-04 – Positional Asphyxia 
•  Training Directive 04-03 – Use of Force Continuum 
 
Form and Reports:  
•  Use of Force Report (UF-002) 
•  Destruction of Animal (DPD 669) 
 

2014 

Page 10 of 10

