306.00 USE OF FORCE

306.01 PHI LOS O PHY
A. The use of force by po lice of fi cers is a mat ter of crit i cal con cern both to the pub lic and the law en force ment com mu -
nity. It is rec og nized that some in di vid u als will not com ply with the law or sub mit to law ful con trol, and that of fi cers
may be called upon to use force in or der to per form their du ties and pro tect them selves and oth ers against as saults
from re sis tive or vi o lent in di vid u als. The use of rea son able force, when war ranted, is per mit ted by law and is an af fir -
ma tive duty and re spon si bil ity of po lice of fi cers [Gra ham v Connor, 490 US 386, (1989)]. Con versely, the un rea son -
able use of force is con trary to law and places the rep re sen ta tive gov ern ment agency in a po si tion of civil li a bil ity, and 
the of fi cer in jeop ardy of civil and crim i nal li a bil ity, as well as dis ci plin ary ac tion. Given that no pol icy can re al is ti -

300 -20

cally pre dict ev ery sit u a tion an of fi cer might en coun ter, each of fi cer must be en trusted with well-rea soned dis cre tion
in de ter min ing the ap pro pri ate re sponse in each in ci dent.

B. A rev er ence and re spect for the dig nity of all per sons and the sanc tity of all hu man life shall guide all train ing, lead er -
ship, and di rec tion as well as guide of fi cers in the use of force. Mem bers of law en force ment de rive their au thor ity
from the pub lic; and there fore, must be ever mind ful that they are not only the guard ians, but also the ser vants of the
pub lic.

C. The le gal stan dard used to de ter mine the law ful ness of an of fi cer’s use of force is whether the of fi cer’s ac tions are
“ob jec tively rea son able” in light of the facts and cir cum stances as they ex isted at the time of the ac tion. An of fi cer’s
ac tions are con sid ered law ful if a rea son able of fi cer could have be lieved the ac tion to be law ful in light of clearly es -
tab lished law and the in for ma tion the of fi cer pos sessed at the time of the ac tion. [Gra ham v Connor, 490 US 386,
(1989)].

306.02  STIP U LA TIONS
A. These guide lines are in tended for in ter nal de part ment use and have not been de vel oped to be ap plied in any civil or
crim i nal pro ceed ing, nor are they in tended to cre ate a higher le gal stan dard of safety or care with re spect to third par -
ties. A vi o la tion of these rules will be grounds for ad min is tra tive dis ci pline only, while a vi o la tion of the law may be
the ba sis for civil or crim i nal pen al ties im posed by a court of law.

B. The pro vi sions of this or der are ap pli ca ble to all reg u lar and re serve of fi cers act ing in their ca pac ity as a po lice of fi -

cer.

306.03  DEF I NI TIONS
A. Force is de fined as the com pul sion or re straint ex erted upon or against a per son for the pur pose of

1. Com pel ling a per son to com ply with an of fi cer’s di rec tion; or
2. Over com ing re sis tance by a sus pect dur ing ar rest or de ten tion; or
3. De fend ing any per son or your self from an ag gres sive ac tion by a sus pect or an other which rep re sents a threat of

B. Deadly force is any force that is rea son ably likely to cause death or se ri ous phys i cal in jury.
C. Con trol for the pur poses of this sec tion, is de fined as the ac tual phys i cal con trol of a sub ject that al lows for the com -

phys i cal in jury or death.

ple tion of a law ful ar rest.

D. Choke holds are the in ten tional use of any tech nique or de vice that ap plies pres sure to a per son’s throat or tra chea

area in a man ner that re stricts their air way or abil ity to breath.

E. Neck-re strain ing tech niques are the in ten tional use of any tech niques or de vice that ap plies pres sure to a per son’s lat -

eral neck area in a man ner that re stricts vas cu lar blood flow likely to re sult in un con scious ness. 

306.04  FORCE OP TIONS
It is im por tant to note that ac tions by an of fi cer shall be pred i cated by the ac tions of the sub ject. Un der no
cir cum stances will the force used by an of fi cer be greater than nec es sary to make an ar rest or a de ten tion or to
pro tect one self or an other, nor will the force be used lon ger than nec es sary to sub due the sus pect, and deadly force
shall not be used ex cept as spe cif i cally pro vided in this di rec tive. The De part ment’s train ing ma te ri als on use of
force are hereby in cor po rated as if fully set forth herein.
A. Dur ing a po lice con tact a sub ject may be:

1. Com pli ant: sub mits to the au thor ity and di rec tion of the po lice.
2. Non-Com pli ant

a. Pas sive Non-Com pli ance: phys i cal be hav ior that hin ders and of fi cer’s at tempt to make the ar rest or the de -
ten tion but does not rep re sent an im me di ate or po ten tial threat to the of fi cer or to a third party. Ex am ples in -
clude, but are not lim ited to, the sub ject re main ing limp or un re spon sive to ver bal com mands; how ever, the
sub ject’s be hav ior does not es ca late to ac tive non-com pli ance.

b. Ac tive Non-Com pli ance: phys i cally ac tive move ments that im pede an of fi cer’s at tempt to con trol, or ac tions 
that pres ent, or could pres ent an im me di ate or po ten tial threat to the of fi cer or a third per son. Ex am ples in -
clude, but are not lim ited to, brac ing, tens ing, push ing, pull ing away from of fi cer, ver bal threats, flee ing, or
ac tions that rea son ably dem on strate in tent to com mit an overt act of ag gres sion or as sault to ward the of fi cer
or to a third party, or at tempt ing to use, or the use of, deadly force.

300-21

B. In re sponse to the above sit u a tions, of fi cers shall be guided in the use of force as fol lows:

1. Of fi cer Pres ence - Rec og ni tion of au thor ity through a uni formed pres ence, marked po lice ve hi cle, iden ti fi able

po lice mark ings, logo, badges, po lice cre den tials, or ver bal iden ti fi ca tion. Ex cludes phys i cal force.

2. Ver bal Com mands - Com mands of di rec tion or re quired com pli ance. 
3. Weap on less Strat e gies - Tech niques de signed to gain com pli ance through weap on less strat e gies and open hand

4. Weapon Strat e gies - Tech niques de signed to gain com pli ance through the use of a de part men tally ap proved con -

con trol tech niques.

trol de vice.

5. Deadly Force- is any force that is rea son ably likely to cause death or se ri ous phys i cal in jury.

306.05 USE OF DEADLY FORCE
A. The use of deadly force is au tho rized only when it is nec es sary for of fi cers to pro tect them selves or oth ers from an im -
me di ate threat of death or se ri ous bodily in jury. Jus ti fi ca tion for the use of deadly force shall be lim ited to the facts
known or rea son ably per ceived by an of fi cer at the time the in ci dent oc curs.

B. Re gard less of the na ture of the crime or the jus ti fi ca tion for the use of deadly force, of fi cers must at all times re mem -
ber their ba sic re spon si bil ity is to pro tect the pub lic. There fore, ex cept to pre serve life or to pre vent se ri ous bodily in -
jury,  of fi cers  shall  not  fire  their  weapon  un der  cir cum stances  that  would  sub ject  other  of fi cers,  by stand ers,  or
hos tages to death or pos si ble in jury. Fir ing a weapon un der such con di tions is not jus ti fied un less the fail ure to do so
at the time would cre ate a sub stan tially greater and im me di ate threat of death or se ri ous bodily in jury.

306.06  RE PORT ING USE OF FORCE IN CI DENTS
A. All use of force in ci dents which re sult in in jury to any per son in volved, in volves the use of a phys i cal con trol method
that in cludes a strike or the ground ing/takedown of a sub ject, or any use of a weapon to con trol a sub ject shall be re -
ported and iden ti fied as
1. “Use of Force”

a. Of fi cers shall re port the full de tails of the use of force in re lated ar rests or of fense re ports. If no ar rest or of -
fense re port is to be com pleted, the de tails shall be re ported in an in ci dent re port. A sep a rate ad min is tra tive
re port will be com pleted by the su per vi sor and elec tron i cally for warded through the of fi cer’s chain of com -
mand to be re viewed.

b. All re ports which de tail a use of force in ci dent shall be com pleted prior to the end of watch.

2. Dep uty Chiefs shall re view each use of force re port to de ter mine if there is a need for changes in de part men tal
pro ce dures, ad di tional train ing for the of fi cer, and/or a re fer ral to the de part ment psy chol o gist. Dep uty Chiefs
shall take ap pro pri ate ac tion based on the ba sis of their de ter mi na tion. All in ci dents that rise to the level of a Crit i -
cal Po lice In ci dent (CPI) should be re ferred to the As sis tant Chief level or the Chief for re view.

3. All Use of Force re ports will be for warded to the Train ing Di vi sion for re view. The pur pose of this re view will be
to en sure the Train ing Di vi sion has the most cur rent in for ma tion avail able as it per tains to train ing meth ods and
cur ric u lums. Re quests for Train ing Di vi sion eval u a tion of a spe cific Use of Force in ci dent shall be di rected to the 
Di rec tor of the Train ing Di vi sion or their designee.

4. As sis tant Chiefs shall con duct pe ri odic au dits to en sure the ob jec tives of man age ment re view are be ing met.
5.

It is rec og nized that ex i gent cir cum stances may oc cur re quir ing an of fi cer to use a weapon or de vice that is out -
side of cur rent pol icy. Any use by an of fi cer of a weapon or de vice not on the de part men tally ap proved weap ons
list, shall be con sid ered for re port ing as a Crit i cal Po lice In ci dent and han dled in ac cor dance with Gen eral Or der
356.00.

306.07 USE OF FORCE TRAIN ING
A. The Po lice De part ment's train ing man ual out lines the ap pro pri ate use of force tech niques ap proved for use by of fi -
cers. Of fi cers are pro hib ited from us ing choke holds and other types of neck-re strain ing tech niques ex cept when pro -
tect ing them selves or oth ers against an im mi nent threat of se ri ous bodily and death.

B. When of fi cers must pro tect them selves or oth ers against im mi nent threat of se ri ous bodily in jury or death, any type

of weapon or tech nique may be uti lized.

300-22

C. All com mis sioned of fi cers of the rank of lieu ten ant and be low and all re serve of fi cers shall qual ify an nu ally in the de -
part ment ap proved ba ton, chem i cal agent, con ducted en ergy de vice, and open-hand con trol train ing pro gram. Fail -
ure to dem on strate qual i fi ca tion stan dards in prac ti cal and writ ten ex am i na tions will re sult in sched ul ing of re me dial
train ing with a cer ti fied con trol tac tics in struc tor, af ter which a re test will be given. Fail ure of the re test will be con -
sid ered as ne glect of duty and may sub ject an of fi cer to ter mi na tion of em ploy ment, and a re serve of fi cer to dis qual i -
fi ca tion from the re serve pro gram for fail ure to main tain an ac cept able level of per for mance.
NOTE:  Re quire ments for fire arms qual i fi ca tion are out lined in Gen eral Or der 202.02, Fire arms Qual i fi ca tion.
D. It shall be the re spon si bil ity of the Train ing Di vi sion cap tain to en sure ap pro pri ate train ing is de vel oped and of fered
an nu ally. The cap tain shall also en sure ap pro pri ate doc u men ta tion of train ing and cer tif i ca tion is en tered in each of fi -
cer’s per son nel file.

E. In the event of changes in train ing re gard ing the use of force, the Train ing Di vi sion shall no tify In ter nal Af fairs, in

writ ing, of all such changes prior to their im ple men ta tion.
It shall be the re spon si bil ity of all su per vi sors to en sure their per son nel at tend the ap pro pri ate train ing.

F.

300-23

