Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

DP300 

 
Use of Force 
 

300.1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE [1.3.1] [1.3.2]  
Any use of force by sworn police personnel of this department is a critical concern, both to the 
public and to the law enforcement community. Officers are engaged in many varied interactions 
and, when the situation deems it appropriate based on all of the facts and circumstances known 
to the officer may use reasonable force in carrying out their duties. 

Sworn police personnel must have a clear understanding of their own authority and the 
limitations that regulate them in their duties. This is paramount as it relates to responding to 
resistance while engaged in the performance of law enforcement duties. 

In vesting police officers and corrections officers with the lawful authority to apply compliance 
techniques to protect the public welfare, a careful balancing of all human interests are required.  
Therefore, our policy is that police officers and corrections officers will use only reasonable force 
to effectively bring an incident under control, while protecting the lives of the officer or another, 
as is more fully set forth in this policy.   

We recognize and respect the value and special integrity of each human life.  However there 
are individuals in our society that do resist our lawful actions.  They may avoid arrest by flight, 
and/or resort to force or violence to commit their crimes, or harm the innocent and weak to 
further their illegal activities. 

This policy provides sworn personnel with guidelines on the use of techniques that are designed 
to allow them to defend themselves and others against physically aggressive subjects or to 
compel uncooperative subjects to obey a legal order. 

The use of unreasonable force will degrade the confidence of the community we serve and may 
result in disciplinary action. Officers are expected to be familiar with this policy and recognize 
that we are guardians and servants of the public. 

 

300.2 COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES [1.3.2] 

Officers shall use compliance techniques in accordance with constitutional law, the Nevada 
Revised Statutes and Henderson Police Department approved Policy and training, to protect the 
rights of citizens and the rights of officers engaged in the control and de-escalation of combative 
or resistant subjects or; the objectively reasonable use of compliance techniques to reach any 
other lawful objective in the course of the officers duties.   

Officers may not use force or any compliance technique that they have not been trained to use, 
unless they can specifically articulate a need that should only exist in the most dangerous of 
situations. 

Any officer that is a witness to another officer using force that may be excessive, unnecessary 
or is clearly beyond the force that is objectively reasonable under the circumstances shall, when 
safe and in the position to do so, intervene to prevent the use of that force.  A sworn police 
officer who witnesses such force, that he/she knows by training and experience to be excessive 
or unnecessary, by another officer should promptly report these observations to a supervisor. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 1 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 
While the priority of this police department is to avoid or minimize injury in every encounter 
requiring a police intervention, there is no requirement in this or any policy that an officer is 
expected to retreat or be exposed to possible physical injury before applying reasonable force. 

 

DEFINITIONS — to better understand and use this policy, the following definitions are provided: 

  Force – The application of physical techniques or tactics, chemical agents (SWAT only) or 
weapons to another person. It is not a use of force when a person allows him/herself to be 
searched, escorted, handcuffed, or restrained.  

  Active Resistance - Active resistance refers to instances in which a subject engages 

muscles groups to defeat an officer's attempts to affect an arrest. Active resistance may not 
be specifically directed toward the officer. Active resistance can include intentional dead 
weight tactics, resistive tension, pushing away, fleeing, locking arms to avoid handcuffing, 
pulling away from an officer or being combative (balling or clenching fists, taking a 
combative or offensive stance, swinging arms, punching, kicking, spitting, head-butting etc.) 
toward an officer who is in the lawful performance of his/her duties. 

  Passive Resistance – Subject is not resisting in any physical way (uncooperative, non-
violent, non-aggressive, unresponsive, conspicuously ignoring direction or commands). 

 

Imminent Jeopardy: An immediate danger that must be instantly met, which cannot be 
guarded against by calling for assistance of others, protection of law, or otherwise defined; 
i.e., the appearance of threatened or impending injury that would put a reasonable and 
prudent person to their instant defense. 

  Overwhelming Force – A strategy in the application of reasonable force that overwhelms a 
subject, rendering the subjects resistance powerless, using all of the resources available at 
the time the force is applied (i.e. facts & circumstances known to the officer, training, assets, 
manpower, environment, communications etc.) in an attempt to control a subject while 
minimizing injuries to the subject and Police Officers. 

  Reasonable Force – The amount of force that another officer with the same or similar 

training and experience, facing the same or similar circumstances, may have employed. 

  Unreasonable Force –The amount of force that another officer with the same or similar 
training and experience, facing the same or similar circumstances, would not have 
employed. 

  Unnecessary Force – Any amount of force that is used by an officer that does not fulfill a 

lawful objective or is needless or uncalled for. 

  Deadly Force – Any amount of force or weapon that is likely to produce death or serious 

physical injury. 

  Physical Force – The use of parts of the body or any substantive material or item exerted 

upon a person that compels that person to involuntarily move, cease movement or 
physically react to that force. 

  Reasonable Belief – The facts or circumstances the officer knows, or should have known at 

the time, are such as to cause an officer with the same or similar training and experience to 
act or think in a similar way under similar circumstances. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 2 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 
  Serious Physical Injury – A bodily injury that creates substantial risk of death, causes 

serious permanent disfigurement or results in long-term loss or impairment of the functioning 
of any bodily member or organ. 

  Low Lethality – A concept of planning and force application that meets operational 

objectives with less potential for causing death or serious physical injury than lethal force 
police tactics. 

  Objective Reasonableness - The calculus of reasonableness must embody allowance for 

the fact that police officers are often forced to make split-second judgments in 
circumstances that are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving - about the amount of force 
that is deemed appropriate in a particular situation. Judgment is made in any use of force 
situation from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, with the same or more 
training and experience, rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight. 

 

300.3 WHEN COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES ARE AUTHORIZED [1.3.2] 

The use of deadly or non-deadly force is restricted to the purposes of self-protection, the 
protection of others, to prevent the escape of a dangerous offender, actions taken to compel or 
constrain resistant/combative subjects, or to take an offender into custody.   

It is nearly impossible, impractical and unrealistic to effectively predict every possible scenario 
an officer might encounter in a use of force situation. Officers are expected and trusted to use 
discretion based on training, experience and the facts and circumstances the officer are faced 
with to determine a reasonable response in each use of force encounter. 

It is also known that an officer may be faced with facts and circumstances in a situation that it 
would be impractical, ineffective or not possible to use any of the tools or weapons issued by 
the department, or employ tactics or methods trained by the department.  Officers may find the 
need to improvise their response to a rapidly evolving situation where a use of force would be 
deemed reasonable.  In this uncommon situation, the use of any improvised tool, device or 
tactic must only be employed to a level that the officer reasonably believes is appropriate to 
effectively de-escalate the situation and to carry out a legitimate law enforcement objective.  If a 
sworn officer of this department takes any action that falls into this improvised response, he/she 
shall be able to articulate the reasons for this response and reinforce this with any investigative 
information (i.e. witness statements, MAV recordings, or any other data available). 

A peace officer may use reasonable force to affect an arrest, to prevent escape or to overcome 
resistance as per state law.  A sworn police officer who is making an arrest, attempting to make 
an arrest, de-escalate or control a situation that is unlawful, protect citizens or other officers or 
achieve any other legitimate law enforcement objective, is not compelled to retreat, cease or 
desist from his/her efforts due to the resistance of or threatened resistance of the person being 
arrested; nor shall such peace officer be deemed the aggressor or lose his/her right to self- 
defense by the use of reasonable force to affect the arrest or to prevent escape or to overcome 
resistance. 

Only those compliance techniques that are deemed reasonable by the officer based on the facts 
and circumstances known to the officer at the time the compliance technique is used shall be 
exercised, as is more fully set forth in this policy. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 3 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 
The reasonableness of a particular use of force must be judged from the perspective of a 
reasonable officer on the scene, rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight. The calculus of 
reasonableness must embody allowance for the fact that police officers are often forced to make 
split-second judgments, in circumstances that are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving, about 
the amount of force that is prudent and practical in a particular situation.  

The reasonableness inquiry in a use of force case is an objective one; the question is whether 
the officers’ actions are objectively reasonable in light of the facts and circumstances 
confronting them, without regard to their underlying intent or motivation. 

The calculus for objective reasonableness is tested in three parts as follows: 

1.  Seriousness of the offense (government’s interest). 

2.  Physical Threat. 

3.  Active resistance or attempt to evade arrest by flight.  

The following factors, in addition to the Calculus for Objective Reasonableness, should be 
considered when time and circumstances permit. These factors include, but are not limited to: 

a.  Subject offender size and ability. 
b.  Availability of weapons or dangerous improvised devices. 
c.  Persons present; other officers, suspects or unknown persons. 
d.  Subjects actions. 
e. 

Immediacy and severity of the threat to officers or others. 

f.  The conduct of the individual being confronted, as reasonably perceived by the officer 

at the time. 

g.  Officer/subject factors (age, size, relative strength, skill level, injuries sustained, level of 
exhaustion or fatigue, the number of officers available vs. the number of subjects). 

h.  The apparent or obvious signs of a presence of drugs or alcohol. 

i.  Subject’s mental state or capacity. 

j.  The degree to which the subject has been effectively restrained and his /her ability to 

resist despite being restrained. 

k.  The availability of other options and their possible effectiveness. 

l.  Seriousness of the suspected offense or the reason for contact with the individual. 

m.  Training and experience of the officer. 

n.  Potential for injury to the officer, suspect and others. 

o.  Whether the person appears to be resisting, attempting to evade arrest by flight or is 

attacking the officer. 

p.  The risk and reasonably foreseeable consequences of escape. 

q.  The apparent need for immediate control of the subject or a prompt resolution of the 

situation. 

r.  Whether the conduct of the individual being confronted no longer reasonably appears 

to pose an imminent threat to the officer or others. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 4 of 21 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

s.  Prior contacts with the subject or awareness of any propensity for violence. 

t.  Any other exigent circumstances. 

In consideration of employing deadly force utilizing the calculus for Objective Reasonableness, 
members may use deadly force to apprehend a fleeing felon ONLY when every other 
reasonable means of effecting the arrest or preventing the escape has been exhausted AND, 

The suspect fleeing poses an immediate threat of death or serious bodily harm to the 
member or others; OR  

There is probable cause to believe the crime committed or attempted was a violent felony, 
which involved an actual or threatened attack which could result in death or serious bodily 
harm; AND 

There is probable cause to believe the person fleeing committed or attempted to commit the 
crime, AND 

Failure to immediately apprehend the person places a member or the public in immediate 
danger of death or serious bodily injury; AND 

The lives of innocent persons will not be endangered if deadly force is used. 

Additionally, in the Detention Center, use of non-deadly force is justifiable to protect property, 
control offenders and to do involuntary Blood Draws by a nurse for DUI's when required by state 
law. 

300.4 CONSIDERATION OF RESPONSE 

1.  When compliance techniques are needed, Department employees should, if at all possible, 
assess an incident to determine, based on training and experience, which options in the 
range of responses will best de-escalate the situation and bring it under control in a safe 
and prudent manner.  

2.  Persons who are suffering from an apparent medical condition and/or who are exhibiting 

extreme agitation, violent behavior accompanied by profuse sweating, strength beyond their 
physical characteristics and who do not respond to pain, or who require a prolonged 
physical encounter with multiple officers to be brought under control, may be at an 
increased risk of sudden death.  Scenarios involving these types of potential medical issues 
should be dealt with expeditiously.  Officers who suspect a medical emergency should 
request medical assistance as soon as practicable and have medical personnel stage away 
if appropriate. In some instances it may be practical to use overwhelming force to de-
escalate a situation and control a subject in an effort to expedite medical treatment and for 
the safety of officers, medical personnel and the subject. 

3. 

In the Detention Center, an offender will be warned in advance before staff uses force 
unless doing so jeopardizes staff safety. 

4.  The following listed use of force/control options is not intended to suggest the order in 

which the various categories of force options should be used in any specific situation. The 
following use of force options should be considered: 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 5 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

Chemical weapons (S.W.A.T. only), deadly force (including the use of empty hands, 
impact tools, firearms or any other means necessary), handcuffs, impact tools including 
less lethal weapons, officer presence, verbal commands, empty hands control, strikes 
(hands, fist, feet), OC spray, Taser, and K9 physical apprehension.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.  Remember that: 

a.  Only reasonable force shall be exercised.   

b.  The force option applied must reflect the totality of circumstances surrounding the 

immediate situation. The officer need only select a force option that is within the range 
of "objectively reasonable" options. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 6 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

c.  Officers must rely on training, experience and assessment of the situation to decide an 
appropriate level of force to be applied. Reasonable and sound judgment will dictate 
the force option to be employed. 

d.  Officers shall either escalate or de-escalate the use of force as the situation progresses 

or circumstances change.  

e.  When reasonable, based on the totality of circumstances, officers shall use 

advisements, warnings, verbal persuasion, and other tactics and recognize that an 
officer may withdraw to a position that is tactically more secure or allows an officer 
greater distance in order to consider or deploy a greater variety of force options. 

f. 

In the spirit of using verbal commands as a reasonable force option in an attempt to 
de-escalate or defuse a situation, occasional aggressive language could be deemed 
reasonable if needed and that language is used in context to control a situation. 

g.  When reasonable, based on the totality of circumstances, and time permitting, officers 

shall also recognize the importance of the consideration of other available resources 
(i.e. S.W.A.T., K9, or other specially trained and specially equipped units). 

h.  When a suspect is under control, either through the application of physical restraint or 

the suspect's compliance, the degree of force will be de-escalated accordingly. If the 
subject requires medical attention, rescue units will be requested immediately or as 
soon as safe to do so. 

i.  An officer may move from any reasonable force option to another reasonable force 

option depending on the violator’s actions or other relevant factors.  

j.  There are no standard rules on the application of force. 

k. 

It is critical for officers to properly document the reason for their actions.   

l.  Members should always be able to articulate the justification for going outside of 

agency policy or training.  

 

 

300.5 REPORTING COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES [1.3.6] [1.3.7] 

1.  When compliance techniques, as they apply to a reasonable use of force option, are used 
to compel or constrain resistant or combative subjects, all involved employees are 
required to complete an incident, arrest, crime, supplemental report, or otherwise document 
the incident.  Photographs should be taken and impounded per Department policy when 
injuries, or complaints of injuries, are received. 

2.  Blue Team reporting is required when reasonable compliance techniques fail and the officer 
is forced to use significant pain compliance techniques or control techniques that 
exceed a firm grip on a resistant and/or combative subject in an effort to overcome the 
subject’s physical attempts to prevent the officer from controlling, subduing or handcuffing 
the subject. 

3.  Only personnel involved in the incident and the actual use of force will complete a Blue 

Team report. Any officer not directly involved in the use of force, but still a witness to the 
use of force, will be listed on the Blue Team as a “Witness Officer”.  

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 7 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

If two or more officers are involved and actually use force, each officer will complete a Blue 
Team and an original or supplemental report in Vision Tek. Officers present but not directly 
involved in the use of force will be listed as witnesses on all BlueTeam reports and must 
complete a supplemental report in Vision Tek detailing their observations. 

300.6 DOCUMENTING A USE OF FORCE 

Refer to the following tables: 

DOCUMENTING A USE OF FORCE – POLICE OFFICER 

Police Officer 

 
4. 

 

 

 

USING COMPUTER REPORTING 

Log into Blue Team Field Support Services 
     Select Use of Force Incident  
     Fill in all appropriate fields (* Fields are mandatory) 
       
Please note that in the narrative section of the BlueTeam Report the 
officer will populate this field with “See Narrative”, the narrative 
portion of the Incident/Crime or Supplemental Report will reflect the 
elements of the use of force. 
     
Articulate the use of force completely in the Incident or Crime Report 
narrative section including the following: 
     The technique used 

Reason for use of technique(s) 
Effectiveness of technique(s) 
Result of technique(s) 
Submit report to supervisor 
Blue Team must be completed prior to end of shift. 
Responds to scene, completes a Use of Force Investigation, review 
for accuracy and completeness add notes in Blue Team that a Use of 
Force Investigation was completed. 
Forward through the chain-of-command to the Division Commander 

As the Chief’s designee, performs an Administrative Review to 
identify whether there are any policy, training, equipment, or 
disciplinary issues. The results must be documented in the comments 
section of the BlueTeam report. [41.2.3e] 
Forward to Internal Affairs Bureau. 
Notify COH Risk Manager the next City business day 
Review for accuracy and completeness.  When the report is 
approved, at the Internal Affairs level, the narrative portion from the 
incident crime report will be copied and pasted into the BlueTeam 
Report. 
Conducts an administrative review for policy and training purposes. 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 8 of 21 

Supervisor 

Internal Affairs 
Bureau 

Use of Force 
Specialist 

05-06-15 
 

Division Commander  Review for accuracy and completeness. 

 
 

 

 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

DOCUMENTING A USE OF FORCE – CORRECTIONS OFFICER 

Corrections Officer 

USING COMPUTER REPORTING 

     Contact Communications to obtain an Event number for any use of 
force incident to be utilized in the Case Number field of the Blue 
Team Report.  When Communications ask for a 400 code you will 
indicate a 498 and the names of all officers involved.  No DR number 
will be utilized for a Blue Team Case Number field. 
Log into Blue Team Field Support Services 
     Select Use of Force Incident   Fill in all appropriate fields (* Fields 
are mandatory) including a full narrative of the incident. 
Please note if the use of force is with an ICE Inmate, you will need to 
add a charge under the involved citizen section and select ICE.  This 
is not needed for uses of force with any other type of inmate. 
     Ensure all appropriate fields are completed. 
     Submit report to supervisor 
       
Blue Team must be completed prior to end of the work week. 
Responds to scene, completes a Use of Force Investigation, review 
for accuracy and completeness add notes in Blue Team that a Use of 
Force Investigation was completed. 
Forward through the chain-of-command to the Superintendent. 
Review for accuracy and completeness. 
As the Chief’s designee, performs an Administrative Review to 
identify whether there are any policy, training, equipment, or 
disciplinary issues. The results must be documented in the comments 
section of the BlueTeam report. [41.2.3e] 
Forward to Internal Affairs Bureau. 
Notify COH Risk Manager the next City business day 
Review for accuracy and completeness. 

Conducts an administrative review for policy and training purposes. 

Supervisor 

Superintendent 

Internal Affairs 
Bureau 
Use of Force 
Specialist 

 
 
300.7 AUTHORIZATION TO CARRY FIREARMS/NON-DEADLY WEAPONS  

[1.3.9] 

Department employees authorized to carry firearms and non-deadly weapons will be instructed 
in the policies described herein and provided with necessary training.  We will provide all 
employees a copy of this order and thoroughly train and test for proficiency before authorizing 
any employee to carry a firearm or non-deadly weapon. [1.3.10] 

300.8 REQUIREMENT TO BE ARMED ON DUTY 

Employees authorized to carry firearms will be armed while on duty, whether in uniform or 
civilian attire, unless otherwise directed by the Chief of Police or his designee.  

 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 9 of 21 

2. 

 

 

 

 

 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

1.  Firearms In Detention Center – Firearms and ammunition are not allowed in the Detention 
Center unless approved by the Chief of Police, Corrections Center Administrator, Assistant 
Administrator or Watch Commander in their absence due to a hostage situation or other 
emergency. 

3.  Prohibited Weapons – Weapons and ammunition not having Department authorization are 

prohibited. 

4.  Weapons Authorized – Only firearms authorized by DP740 may be carried on duty. 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

300.10 USE OF FIREARMS 

Department employees are not authorized to draw or display their firearms unless the 
circumstances create a reasonable belief that it may be necessary to use the firearm in 
conformance with these procedures. 

Employees faced with using a firearm, and given a safe and reasonable opportunity, will identify 
themselves and state their intention to shoot. 

300.11 RESTRICTED USE OF FIREARMS [1.3.3] 

Employees are restricted from discharging a firearm in the following cases, unless it is 
reasonably certain that the employee’s life, or that of another person, is in imminent jeopardy: 

  As a warning shot. 

  At or from a moving vehicle. Officers should seek alternatives to shooting at or from a 
moving vehicle.  An Officer should only discharge a firearm at a moving vehicle or its 
occupants when the officer reasonably believes that he/she, another officer or any other 
person is in imminent danger due to the facts and circumstances known to the officer, and 
there are no other reasonable means available to stop the deadly threat of the driver/vehicle 
or if the occupants of that vehicle pose a deadly threat to officers or others. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 10 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 
  Officers should not shoot at any part of a vehicle in an attempt to disable the vehicle. 

 

If it appears likely a bystander may be injured.  

  Solely to protect property interests    

   

300.12 PARAMETERS FOR USE OF COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES 

Officers are authorized to use Department approved non-deadly compliance techniques as 
follows: 

  To protect themselves or another from physical harm. 

  To restrain or subdue a resistant suspect. 

  Bring an unlawful situation safely and effectively under control. 

  To control offenders, protect property and to do involuntary blood draws per State Law. 

300.13 WEAPONS AUTHORIZED DURING USE OF COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES [1.3.4] 

Officers are not permitted to use a low lethality weapon unless qualified in its use as determined 
by training procedures.  The following low lethality weapons are authorized: 

  Side-handle baton or expandable straight baton (ASP). 

  Taser. 

  Pepper Spray. 

  Handcuffs and restraints. 

  Less Lethal.  

300.14 DEADLY FORCE TECHNIQUE PARAMETERS [1.3.2] 

Officers are authorized to use Department approved deadly compliance techniques as follows: 

  Protect themselves or others from what is reasonably believed to be an IMMEDIATE threat 

of death or serious bodily harm. 

  Prevent the escape of a fleeing felon whom the officer has probable cause to believe will 

pose a significant and immediate threat to human life should escape occur. 

  To destroy an animal that represents a threat to public safety, or as a humanitarian measure 
where the animal is seriously injured. If a firearm is used in this manner, it is not considered 
a “Use of Force” and will not be reported in the BlueTeam reporting system. Refer to 
DP300.16 for reporting procedures. 

 

 

 

 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 11 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 
300.15 WEAPONS AUTHORIZED DURING DEADLY FORCE 

Employees are permitted to use only the following Department authorized deadly weapons 
listed in DP740 (only after being approved by their chain of command) in the line of duty: 

  Department issued, or personally owned and Department approved revolver(s) and/or 

semiautomatic pistol(s). 

  Department owned, or personally owned and Department approved rifles/shotguns. 

  Department owned special-duty rifles and machine guns. 

  Any of the low lethality weapons listed in Section 300.13 of this policy when their use falls 

under the scope of deadly force or techniques. 

  Any other device necessary to stop the suspect’s actions. 

 

 

300.16 OFFICER’S REPORT ON THE COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES [1.3.6] 

The Department investigates compliance techniques and actions taken to compel or constrain 
resistant/combative subjects as they apply to the following use of force options: Strikes (hands, 
fists, feet) the use of any restraint other than handcuffs on a physically combative subject (i.e. 
hobble, spit mask), OC Spray, Taser, impact tools, firearms, and deadly force, to determine their 
justification, as well as to correct any identifiable training deficiencies. Note: Use of the Hobble 
or spit mask as a preventative measure, on a subject who is not combative or resistant, does 
not require a Blue Team supplemental report.  

Employees involved in applying compliance techniques will notify their supervisor immediately.  
The involved employee(s) will complete a Blue Team, Use of Force Report, which will be 
forwarded to the Internal Affairs Bureau when: 

  When lethal or non-lethal compliance techniques are used on a person, including the use of 

a firearm. 

  Other actions considered compliance techniques, such as intentional traffic collisions. 

  Other actions used to compel or constrain resistant or combative subjects. 

  When OC Spray and/or the restraint chair are used by corrections personnel. 

If a firearm is used to destroy an animal that is either suffering, as a humanitarian act, or to 
protect the public’s safety or the Officer’s safety during the normal course of that officer’s legal 
duty, no BlueTeam will be completed. Instead, the officer articulately report the incident through 
the VisionTek reporting system and additionally complete an “Officer’s Discharge of Firearms”, 
HPD#0014. 

300.17 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INVESTIGATION OF COMPLIANCE 
            TECHNIQUES [1.3.5] 

Investigating Compliance Techniques When No Death or Substantial Bodily Harm 
Follows the Use of Force 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 12 of 21 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

DP300 

1.  Officer 

 
The procedures for investigation of compliance techniques are: 

a.  Makes an initial assessment as to the extent of injuries, if any, to any person(s) after 
any use of force that result in the complaint of or officer’s observance of an injury. 

b.  Determines whether or not first aid or paramedic response is necessary to include 
notifying dispatch and ensuring appropriate first aid or paramedic assistance is 
provided. 

c. 

Immediately summons a supervisor to the scene if force is used or alleged. 

2.  On-Scene Supervisor (Acting or promoted) 

a.  A supervisor will respond to all scenes when force is used or a Use of Force is alleged 
or a firearm is discharged outside of the firing range. The Supervisor will determine if a 
Blue Team is necessary.  If a Blue Team is necessary, the Supervisor will conduct an 
on scene Use of Force Investigation which includes the following steps: 

1) 

 Identify all officers involved and evaluate the officers’ injuries and wellbeing. 

2) 

 Identify injuries or complaints of injuries of others involved and insure   
appropriate medical care is provided. 

3) 

 Ensure the scene is secure. 

4)  Ensure all witnesses are identified, contacted (separated if possible) and provide 

written statements if they are willing. 

5)  Review witness statements to ensure completion and the witnesses location at the 

time of the incident.   

6) 

Identify all sources of video/audio surveillance and recordings. 

7)  Review footage and ensure it is collected and impounded. 

8)  Review and tag MAV on the scene if it is likely that the force was captured on the 

system. 

9)  Ensure photographs of the scene, the suspect/officers injuries or claimed injuries 

are taken and impounded correctly. 

Supervisors will refer to DP351, Specialized Assistance within HPD, in determining if call 
out of other units is needed.  

If the Investigative Services Division is responding, only minimal, preliminary questions should 
be asked by the supervisor about the incident.  The officer(s) should be advised that a more 
detailed debriefing will be conducted at a later time. 

At all times, when at the scene of the incident, the supervisor should handle the officer(s) and all 
involved personnel in a manner that acknowledges the potential stress caused by the incident. 

 

 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 13 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 
300.18 INVESTIGATING COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES WHEN DEATH OR  
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM FOLLOWS THE USE OF FORCE OR 
WHERE THE USE OF FORCE INVOLVES UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES 

a.  Ensures appropriate first aid or paramedic response is provided to any person(s) 

The procedures for investigation of compliance techniques are: 

1.  Officer 

after any use of force. 

b. 

Immediately summons a supervisor to the scene. 

2.  On-Scene Supervisor 

a. 

Is dispatched to the scene of the incident, and assumes primary responsibility in 
caring for involved personnel and integrity of the scene. On scene supervisors will 
use the Incident Command System model (DP361). Consideration should be given 
to:  

(1)  Locating witnesses requesting written statements.     

(2)  Staging areas for the responding personnel and media. 

(3)  Perimeters to include an inner and outer crime scene perimeter.  

(4)  Command Post location. 

(5)  Evacuation locations. 

(6)  Ingress and egress routes. 

(7)  A sequestered location for officers involved. 

(8)  Activation of the Mobile Command Vehicle. 

b.  Where possible and appropriate, meets briefly with the involved officer(s). 

c.  Determines if the officer(s) was on duty or acting in the capacity of a police officer 

d.  When applicable, have directly involved officers turn off their personal MAV wireless 

while off duty.  

microphones. 

e.  Only minimal, preliminary questions should be asked by the supervisor as to the 

officers involved, suspect(s), crime scene location, and witnesses.  

f.  No further questions should be asked at this time unless directed by the 

Investigations supervisor.  The officer(s) should be advised that a more detailed 
debriefing will be conducted at a later time. 

g.  At all times, when at the scene of the incident, all supervisors should handle the 

officer(s) and all involved personnel in a manner that acknowledges the stress 
caused by the incident. 

h.  Notifies the next level of command in his chain, normally the Watch Commander or 

Division Commander, and the Investigations Sergeant as soon as possible of the 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 14 of 21 

DP300 

 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

shooting or critical incident. The Watch Commander or Division Commander is 
responsible for making further notification up the chain-of-command. 

i.  Supervises, in cooperation with the Investigations Supervisor, the involved officer(s). 

(1)  After consultation with the Investigative Services Division supervisor, the 

involved officer(s) may be taken to a quiet area away from the scene. A 
supervisor of the rank of Sergeant or above designated by the Watch 
Commander or on scene supervisor, will remain with the involved officer(s) 
insuring the integrity of the quiet area. Only those persons allowed by this policy 
shall be permitted access to the involved officers. 

(2)  The quiet/sequestered area shall be selected to insure the officers involved are 
out of sight from the media, the public, and the scene until being transported to 
the area designated by the Investigative Services Supervisor for further 
investigation. 

(3)  If requested, a peer counselor or other supportive friend or officer should 

remain with the officer(s), but should be advised not to discuss details of the 
incident. 

1.  The designated supervisor makes appropriate arrangements for the caring 

for involved personnel, including arrangements for all necessary medical 
treatment, response by peer support personnel, calling out the on-call 
Police Department Chaplain and P.E.A.P. Coordinator, or designee. 

2.  Notifications to the respective Union along with advising each officer 

involved their right to have legal counsel and/or a union representative 
present. 

3.  On-Scene Chain-of Command  

a.  The Chain of Command often wishes to respond to the scene to offer support to the 

involved officers. This support should not involve questions as to the officers’ 
involvement in the incident, but should be brief and supportive in nature. 

b.  The HPOA and HPSA representatives can also offer support. One union 

representative will be allowed to contact the officer involved to advise the officer that 
their respective union is present and available, as well as any legal counsel. This 
support should not involve questions as to the officers’ involvement in the incident, 
but should be brief and supportive in nature.  

c. 

Involved officers requesting legal representation or union representation will be 
afforded that right. 

4. 

Investigative Services Division  

a.  The Investigative Services Division is responsible for investigations anytime a deadly force 
technique is used, where death or substantial bodily harm, which may lead to death, occurs 
as a result of the use of compliance techniques or where the use of force involves unusual 
circumstances.  In these cases, the Watch Commander will contact the ISD Lieutenant 
reference Investigations handling the incident (for further information, refer to IPM2200).   

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 15 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

b.  Coordinates with the IC to authorize officer(s) to leave the scene and be taken to a 

quiet, secure setting when involved officer(s) are no longer required to remain on 
scene and the best interest of the Officers has been considered. 

c.  Meets briefly with the involved officers, where possible and 

(1)  Asks only minimal, preliminary questions about the incident. 

(2)  Conducts a walkthrough with Officers, and his/her representative(s), when the 
officer is physically and emotionally ready.  Advises officer(s) that a more 
detailed debriefing will be conducted at a later time. 

d.  Advises officer(s) not to discuss the incident with anyone except a personal 

attorney, union representative, doctor or Department Investigator until the 
conclusion of the preliminary investigation. 

e.  The Investigative Services Division will facilitate the reviewing of any audio/video 

recordings or other media sources, of the incident, by the officer(s) involved during 
the criminal investigation. 

f.  The Investigative Services Division is responsible for the officer's duty weapon 
being taken for laboratory analysis.  When the duty weapon is taken, the lead 
investigator shall: 

(1)  Assist Crime Scene Investigators in taking custody of the officer's weapon in a 
discrete manner (out of view of the public) for processing, analysis and booking 
into evidence. 

(2)  Arrange for replacement with another weapon, or advise the officer that it will 

be returned or replaced at a later time, as appropriate. 

 

 

300.19 POST-INCIDENT PROCEDURES [1.3.8] 

1.  Release of Information - In all cases, no information concerning the names or positions 
of officers involved in shooting incidents shall be released to any media representative or 
other person without the approval of the Chief of Police. 

a.  Generally, the Chief of Police will not authorize release of such information for 48 

hours. 

Police.  

b.  No audio or video recordings will be released without the approval of the Chief of 

2. 

Incident Review Leave - Involved personnel in incidents where their actions or use of 
force results in a death or serious physical injury or any other incident at the direction of 
the Chief of Police, will be removed from line duties pending the conclusion of the 
administrative investigation.  

3.  Post-Incident Counseling - The affected Division Commander, or their designee, and 
the P.E.A.P Coordinator will work together to ensure all officers directly involved in a 
shooting incident are scheduled to meet with a designated specialist for counseling and 
evaluation as soon as practical after the incident.  An Incident Review Template will be 
completed and updated by the P.E.A.P. Coordinator and sent to the affected Division 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 16 of 21 

DP300 

 

 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

Commander or their designee, for review.  The Incident Review Template will then be 
sent out via email to the Command Team and all affected supervisors by the Division 
Commander. 

Upon direction of the Chief of Police or their designee, involved support personnel may 
also be required to meet with such specialists after a shooting incident.  The P.E.A.P. 
Coordinator will be responsible for scheduling these appointments. 

After the clinical sessions, the specialist shall advise the Chief of Police: 

a.  Whether it would be in the employee’s best interest to continue on administrative 

leave or modified duty, and for how long. 

b.  The best continued course of action or counseling. 

The P.E.A.P. Coordinator will be contacted by the designated specialist when an 
employee has completed all necessary clinical sessions and is released from his/her 
care.  The release form will be faxed to the affected Deputy Chief of Police.  The 
designated police administrative specialist will complete the administrative orders. 

The agency strongly encourages the families and significant others of the involved 
officers to take advantage of available counseling services. 

4.  Departmental Briefings – The Department will brief other agency employees 

concerning the incident so rumors are kept to a minimum. Department employees are 
encouraged to show the involved officers their concern. 

All personnel involved in a shooting incident will be advised that they are not permitted to 
speak with the media about the incident.  Officers shall refer inquiries from the media to 
a designated agency spokesperson unless otherwise authorized to release a statement 
pertaining to the incident. 

In order to protect against crank or abusive calls, officers will be advised to have phone 
calls answered by another person for several days after their names are released to the 
public. 

During debriefings, officers and department employees will not discuss the specific 
details or justification of the Officer Involved Shooting or the Use of Force, which will be 
determined later by the responsible investigating body. 

All department employees are reminded that all information discussed is for internal 
purposes only. All supervisors should be aware and guard against any misinformation or 
rumors that may be heard. The Chief of Police should be notified through the chain of 
command in these cases.  

Briefings are considered an integral part of the post-incident procedure. The following 
briefings will be held to address immediate stress related issues, as well as procedural 
review and training issues: 

a.  Administrative Briefing – This should occur within hours of the incident and 

attended by the Command Staff and PIO’s. It will be conducted by the Investigative 
Services Captain or their designee. 

b. 

Incident Briefing Email – The Chief of Police, or their designee, will be responsible 
for providing a brief summary to the rest of the department personnel about the 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 17 of 21 

DP300 

 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

incident. The briefing email is intended to provide some preliminary information and 
to keep rumors to a minimum. 

c.  Squad Debriefings- This debriefing should occur on the first day back for the squad 
or squads involved in the incident. Only those squads involved in the actual incident 
should attend to openly discuss the incident prior to going back onto the street. The 
involved officer(s) are encouraged to attend, but are not required to participate if 
they choose not to. A representative from P.E.A.P. will be made available to attend 
this debriefing. Any questions that arise during the debriefing that cannot be 
answered will be followed up by the Sergeant or Lieutenant immediately and 
answers provided to the squad as early as possible. 

d.  Critical Incident/Stress Debriefing – This should occur 24 to 72 hours after the 
incident and after investigative interviews are conducted with those personnel 
involved in the incident. The Critical Incident Stress Debriefing is intended for those 
Officers and Supervisors immediately involved in the incident. A separate Critical 
Incident Stress Debriefing will be conducted for Support Personnel (e.g. 
Communications).  These meetings will be set up by the P.E.A.P Coordinator who 
will send an email to all the supervisors involved in the incident to ensure all 
appropriate personnel are invited to the debriefing. The P.E.A.P. Coordinator will 
facilitate the debriefing and have a Police Captain in attendance. No written records 
or recordings will be allowed. This debriefing is intended for personnel to talk about 
the incident in an open non-judgmental environment. 

The Chief of Police may add or cancel any briefings/debriefings as deemed appropriate. 

5. 

Interested Parties Meetings – At the conclusion of the criminal investigation, the 
Investigative Services Division Captain will have a presentation prepared of the criminal 
investigation and notify the Chief through the chain of command when this presentation 
is complete. This presentation will be reviewed by the Chief and may be offered to the 
family members of the deceased person. The ISD Captain or designee will coordinate 
the meeting and will be present at such meeting.  Upon conclusion of the meeting a 
memorandum will be forwarded to the Chief of Police through the chain of command 
with a summary of the meeting. 

6.  Police Action Review Committee - The Police Action Review Committee (PARC) will 

conduct an administrative investigation into the circumstances of an incident as it relates 
to employee actions in risk related events up to and including deadly force situations.  
The committee’s focus will compare the employee’s actions to existing department policy 
and procedure and conduct a training evaluation of the incident.  Refer to DP302 for 
additional information on PARC. 

7.  Return to Duty - The Chief of Police may return personnel to duty upon completion and 

review of the following: 

a.  Clearance from an agency designated specialist for counseling and evaluation. 

b.  Report from the Investigative Services Division concerning the facts of the 

investigation. 

c.  Report from the Police Action Review Committee. 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 18 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

8.  Requalification – Upon being released back to full duty, the Officer must qualify with all 

of their assigned weapons.  

300.20 DAILY STRESS RECOGNITION 

1.  As post-traumatic stress disorders may not arise immediately, or the employee may attempt 
to hide the problem, each supervisor is responsible for monitoring the behavior of unit 
employees for abnormal symptoms of the disorder. 

2.  A supervisor may request, through their chain of command, that an officer seek assistance 

or counseling from a mental health specialist upon a reasonable belief that stress may be 
disrupting the officer's job performance.  Any further action will be at the discretion of the 
Chief of Police. 

300.21 TRAINING 

1.  All employees will receive training pertaining to post-traumatic stress disorder and the 

uniform procedures contained in this policy on a regular basis. 

2.  Supervisors are responsible for making available to their unit personnel information about 
the agency’s peer counseling group, City EAP, or other Department or City sponsored 
mental health services. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accreditation  Standards 

CALEA 1.2.2, Legal Authority to Carry/Use Weapons 
CALEA 1.3.1,  Use of Reasonable Force 
CALEA 1.3.2,  Use of Deadly Force 
CALEA 1.3.3,  Warning Shots 
CALEA 1.3.4,  Use of Authorized Less Lethal Weapons 
CALEA 1.3.5,  Rendering Aid After Use of Weapons 
CALEA 1.3.6,  Reporting Uses of Force 
CALEA 1.3.7,  Reviewing Reports of 1.3.6 
CALEA 1.3.8,  Removal from Line of Duty Assignment, Use of Force 
CALEA 1.3.9,  Authorization: Weapons and Ammunition 
CALEA 1.3.10, Demonstrating Proficiency with Weapons 
CALEA 1.3.12, Issuing Written Directives 
CALEA 22.2.6, Employee Assistance Program 
CALEA 74.3.1, Procedure, Criminal Process 
PSCA 2.2.6 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 19 of 21 

 
 
 

05-06-15 
 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

NRS 208.065 
NRS 484C.160 
D.T.I. “Range of Response” 

References 

 

 
 

Date effective 
11-30-11 

Revision History 

Purpose 

Add Police Action Review Committee, 300.18 
Update P.E.A.P. Coordinator duties, 300.18 
Add Critical Incident Debriefing for Support Personnel, 300.18. 
Remove “Tactical Debriefing and Review” section, 300.18.  
Changed to new format. 
Minor syntax/word changes. 
Changed from DM650 to DP300. 
Revision with extensive changes from Command Team. 
§300.19.5 Post -Incident procedures, Interested Parties Meetings - 
added "may be" in front of "offered" in the sentence: "This 
presentation will be reviewed by the Chief and offered to the family 
members of the deceased person."  
§300.5 Reporting Compliance Techniques – added information 
regarding Supplemental Blue Team reports. 
§300.16 Officer’s Report on the Compliance Techniques, added 
clarifying language regarding “physically combative subjects” and “not 
combative or resistant” subjects for the determination of whether to 
submit a Blue Team supplemental report. 
Updates related to the A.C.L.U. Recommendations R report. 
Added language to sections 300.1,2,3,4, and 13.  
Portions of §300.1-4, and §300.11 reworded based on the ACLU 
Recommendations Report. 
§300.15 follow-up correction: changed “DM-0700 and DM-0704” to 
“DP740”; changed “…non-deadly weapons listed in Section 650.12…” 
to “…low lethality weapons listed in Section 300.13…” 
300.6 Table - Addition of "Perform Administrative Review" in Division 
Commander section & delete "when necessary" from IAB section. 
This is necessary to meet CALEA standard 1.3.7. 

 

 

300.14 – Updated reporting requirements for using a firearm to 
destroy an animal. 
300.16 – Added reporting requirements when using a firearm to 
destroy an animal. 
300.5 – Updated reporting compliance techniques. 
300.6 – Added tables for “Police Officer” and “Corrections Officer” 
under Documenting a use of force and updated procedure for 

2-15-12 
 
3-14-12 

5-9-12 

7-18-12 

7-3-13 

10-2-13 

 

11-18-13 

06-18-14 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 20 of 21 

DP300 

Henderson Police Department Policy 
Use of Force 

 

 

reporting. 
300.6 – Internal Affairs Bureau will copy and paste the report 
narrative to the BlueTeam report once approved. Deleted their 
requirement to conduct the administrative review. 
300.6 – Added Use of Force Specialist to conduct an administrative 
review for policy and training purposes. 
Updated verbiage in definitions throughout entire policy to reflect 
current standards. 
Require a supervisor to respond to a use of force and complete an 
investigation. 

05-06-15 

05-06-15 
 

Henderson Police Department Policy 

Page 21 of 21 

