KANSAS CITY MISSOURI POLICE DEPARTMENT 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTION 

 
DATE OF ISSUE 

10-11-13 

Response to Resistance 

Procedural Instruction entitled, "Firearms Procedure" 

 

EFFECTIVE DATE 
10-12-13 

AMENDS 

           

NO.  

 

13-3 

RESCINDS

Procedural Instruction 09-10  
Patrol Bureau Memorandum 11-3 
 

 

 

 
SUBJECT 

REFERENCE 

POLICY 

This department and its members recognize and respect the value of human life.  In 
permitting  members  with  lawful  authority  to  use  force  to  protect  the  public  welfare, 
and  for  the  apprehension  and  control  of  subjects,  a  careful  balancing  of  all  human 
interests is required.  Therefore, it is the policy of this department that a member will 
use that force that is objectively reasonable given the totality of the circumstances to 
bring an incident under control or apprehend a subject(s).   

TERMINOLOGY 

Agitated/Excited  Delirium:    State  of  extreme  mental  and  physiological 
excitement, characterized by extreme agitation, hyperthermia, extreme tearing of 
the  eyes,  hostility,  exceptional  strength,  and  endurance  without  fatigue.    Other 
signs or symptoms may include, but are not limited to, profuse sweating, foaming 
at the mouth, hallucinations, and exhibiting signs of a high body temperature. 

Air Cartridge:  A replaceable cartridge which uses compressed gases to fire two 
probes  on  connecting  wires  sending  a  high  voltage/low  current  signal  into  a 
subject. 

 
*C.  Conducted Energy Weapon (CEW):  A weapon primarily designed to disrupt a 
subject's  central  nervous  system  by  means  of  deploying  electrical  energy 
sufficient to cause uncontrolled muscle contractions and override an individual's 
voluntary motor responses. 

Deadly  Force:    Any  use  of  force  that  is  likely  to  cause  death  or  serious  bodily 
injury. 

 
*E.  Deploying Officer:  The officer who has control of and activates the CEW. 
 
*F.  Discharge:  Any activation of a CEW at an animal or human being, even if the 
probes  miss  the  intended  target.  For  administrative  tracking  purposes  a  CEW 
misfire will also be treated as a discharge. 

 
*G.  Misfire:    When  the  CEW  is  activated  and  the  probes  do  not  deploy  or  an 
electrical arc is not observed between the electrodes affixed to the front of the 
CEW. 

Non-Deadly  Force:    Any  use  of  force  other  than  that  which  is  considered 
deadly. 

A. 

 
B. 

 
D. 

 
H. 

 

 

 

*I. 
 

 
II. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
PROCEDURE 

III. 

A. 

General Guidelines 

1. 

A supervisor and a commander will respond to the scene when: 

 

A CEW is activated.  

An officer uses deadly force. 

A supervisor will respond to the scene when: 

*a. 
 

b. 

a. 

 
b. 

 
*c.  

 
2. 
 

3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 

 
7. 

 
*8. 

A  subject  requires  or  requests  medical  treatment  as  the  result  of 
an officer using force. 

An officer requires medical attention as a result of a subject using 
force. 

A subject falls unconscious from the use of a Lateral Vascular Neck 
Restraint (LVNR®) or the Front Neck Control (FNC). 

 

Officers are not to strike anyone in the head with a weapon e.g., baton, 
shotgun, handgun, etc., except in situations where its use is objectively 
reasonable considering the totality of the circumstances. 

Once  a  subject  is  under  control  and  handcuffed,  department  members 
will  place  the  subject  on  his/her  side  or  in  a  seated  position  while 
awaiting  transportation  to  a  detention  facility.    At  no  time  will 
department  members  handcuff  and  leg  shackle  an  arrest’s  hands 
and feet together (commonly referred to as hog tying). 

Department members will seek medical attention for persons exhibiting 
signs  of  agitated/excited  delirium,  as  soon  as  circumstances  allow.  
Additionally,  they  should  monitor  the  subject  for  consciousness  until 
medical assistance arrives. 

Department members are cautioned not to use the LVNR® on subjects 
sprayed with Oleoresin Capsicum, except in situations where its use is 
objectively reasonable considering the totality of the circumstances. 

The  aerosol  chemical  agent  orthoclorobenzal-malononitrile  (CS)  is 
available and its deployment is most often determined by extraordinary 
or command decisions. 

Only a department issued CEW will be carried.  The CEW will be carried 
on  the  non-gun  side,  in  a  department  issued  holster,  with  an  air 
cartridge attached to the front of the CEW and the safety engaged. 

-2- 

 

 

 

*9. 

In any situation that results in an officer being disarmed of the CEW, the 
officer  will  use  reasonable  force  to  defend  himself/herself  to  avoid 
incapacitation  and  possibility  of  the  subject  gaining  control  of  the 
officer's firearm. 

*Note:  When an officer is disarmed of the CEW, guidelines set forth in 
the current written directive entitled, "Firearms Procedures," will 
be followed. 

 

B. 

Guidelines for NON-DEADLY FORCE 

 

1. 

 
2. 

3. 

Members  will  evaluate  the  situation  to  determine  which  available  non-
deadly  force  technique  or  issued  equipment  should  be  used  to  control 
the situation without compromising their safety or the safety of others. 

Members  may  use  department  approved  non-deadly  force  techniques 
and issued equipment to: 

Effect an arrest. 

Restrain or subdue a resistant individual. 

Protect themselves and others from physical injury. 

a. 
 
b. 
 
c. 
 
d. 
 
Following the use of non-deadly force, immediate medical attention will 
be  provided  or  obtained  for  any  individual  if  deemed  necessary  by  the 
officer or if requested by the individual. 

Bring an unlawful situation safely and effectively under control. 

Post-Application Care of Non-Deadly Force. 

C. 
 

1. 

If  a  subject  appears  to  be  exhibiting  signs  of  agitated/excited  delirium 
members will: 

Request Emergency Medical Services (EMS) personnel to respond 
to the scene. 

Request a field supervisor to respond to the scene. 

 
*2.  When  a  member  uses  the  LVNR®  or  FNC  and  a  subject  falls 

unconscious, the member will: 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

 
b. 

 
 
 
 
 

-3- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 
 

 

a. 

 
b. 

*c. 

d. 

a. 
 
*b. 
 
c. 

 
d. 
 

Call for EMS personnel to respond to the scene. 

*(1) 

Inform EMS personnel that the subject fell unconscious while 
the LVNR® or FNC was being applied. 

(2) 

Request  EMS  personnel  to  determine  if  the  subject  will  be 
transported to a medical facility. 

b. 

Request a field supervisor to respond to the scene. 

 

*3.  When a member uses the CEW the member will: 

 

NOT ATTEMPT to remove a probe if it is imbedded in the following 
areas  of  soft  tissue:  face,  neck,  ear,  breast,  or  groin.  In  this 
instance,  THE  PROBE  SHOULD  BE  REMOVED  BY  MEDICAL 
PERSONNEL ONLY.  

Remove probes using current training guidelines. 

Provide  an  antiseptic  wipe  and  clean  dry  bandage  to  the  person 
that has been subjected to the CEW.   

Request  a  field  supervisor  and  commander  to  respond  to  the 
scene. 

 

 

4.  When  a  member  uses  Oleoresin  Capsicum  aerosol  spray  and/or  pepper 

foam (MK-46 and MK-9 Pepper Foggers) the member will: 

Ensure the subject receives fresh air. 

Rinse affected area with large amounts of cool water.   

Call  for  EMS  personnel  to  respond  to  the  scene  if  requested  or 
appears necessary. 

Request a field supervisor to respond to the scene. 

D. 

Guidelines for DEADLY FORCE 

Officers are authorized to use deadly force in order to: 

Protect  themselves  or  others  from  what  they  have  probable  cause  to 
believe  is  an  immediate  or  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  bodily 
harm. 

1. 

 
 
 
 
 

-4- 

 

 

 

 

 

2. 

To prevent the escape of a person: 

From the vicinity of a violent crime or confrontation during which 
the  officer  has  probable  cause  to  believe  that  the  person  has 
caused or attempted to cause death or serious bodily harm to the 
officer(s) or other persons, or 

 
b.  Who  they  have  probable  cause  to  believe  is  armed  and  has 
committed  an  offense  in  which  he/she  caused  or  attempted  to 
cause death or serious bodily harm to another person, or 

Who  they  have  probable  cause  to  believe  may  otherwise 
endanger  life  or  inflict  other  serious  physical  injury  unless 
arrested without delay. 

 

E. 

Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.  -  The  utilization  of  wrist  locks,  empty 
hand tactics and handcuffing alone do not require the Response to Resistance, 
Form  246  P.D.,  to  be  completed.    The  wrist  locks,  empty  hand  tactics,  and 
handcuffing  should  be  noted  by  marking  the  “Other”  box  on  the  Response  to 
Resistance, Form 246 P.D., when used in conjunction with the tactics outlined in 
this section.  

The case detective will complete The Response to Resistance, Form 246 
P.D., without a narrative, when: 

A  member  discharges  a  firearm  at  a  person,  involving  death, 
injury, or no injury. 

A death occurs as a result of any use of force. 

The  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  will  be  completed  by  the 
member when they use: 

A  non-deadly  weapon  i.e.,  capsicum,  baton  if  used  as  an  impact 
weapon,  MK-46  &  MK-9  Pepper  Foggers,  CEW  is  used  against  a 
person  including  any  air  cartridge  discharge,  drive  stun,  or  misfire 
intended to impact a subject. 

A LVNR® or an FNC.  The FNC will be documented by marking the 
“Other”  box  on  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  and 
adding “Front Neck Control.” 

Any force which causes injury that requires medical treatment. 

A beanbag round discharged at a person. 

-5- 

a. 

 
c. 

a. 

 
b. 

 
*a. 

 
*b. 

c. 
 
d. 

*1. 

 

 
2. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

b. 
 
c. 
 
*d. 

A  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  will  be  completed  by  the 
Canine  Officer  when  a  subject  receives  a  canine  bite  as  a  result  of  an 
apprehension. 

The  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  will  be  completed  when  a 
subject: 

Uses  force  that  results  in  injury  to  an  officer  that  requires  medical 
treatment. 

Uses a weapon against an officer regardless of injury. 

Uses force that causes the death of an officer. 

A  supervisor  reserves  the  right  to  have  a  member  complete  a 
Response to Resistance, Form 246 P.D., in any circumstance that, 
the  supervisor,  documentation  would  be 
in 
reasonable. 

the  opinion  of 

The Response to Resistance, Form 246 P.D., will be completed for each 
incident described.  A copy of all applicable reports, or the Detention Unit 
Incident  Report,  Form  5123  P.D.,  will  be  attached  instead  of  rewriting 
the  required  narrative.    If  applicable,  statements  taken  by  the  Violent 
Crimes  Division  detective  may  be  attached  at  the  discretion  of  a 
supervisor or commander to the Response to Resistance, Form 246 
P.D., in place of completing the narrative section.  (No reference to the 
Response to Resistance, Form 246 P.D., will be made in any case report.) 

Should  the  member  using  force  be  injured  and  unable  to  complete  the 
Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  the  immediate  supervisor  will 
ensure the form is completed by another member. 

A case report number will not be obtained for the Response to Resistance, 
Form  246  P.D.,  but  the  case  report  number  of  any  other  report  taken  in 
regard  to  the  incident  will  be  included  in  the  appropriate  space  on  the 
Response to Resistance, Form 246 P.D. 

The  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  will  be  forwarded  through 
the  chain  of  command  to  the  Bureau  Commander.    The  Bureau 
Commander  will  forward  the  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D., 
directly to the Internal Affairs Unit with a copy also being forwarded to the 
Training  Division.    The  Response  to  Resistance,  Form  246  P.D.,  will not 
be sent to the Records Unit. 

The  Internal  Affairs  Unit  will  be  responsible  for  receiving,  collecting  and 
retaining the Response to Resistance, Forms 246 P.D. 

*3. 

 
4. 

 

5. 

 
6. 

7. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

 

-6- 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
*F. 

10.  No information contained on the Response to Resistance, Form 246 P.D., 
will  be  released  to  persons  or  agencies  outside  the  department  without 
prior  approval  from  the  Chief  of  Police  with  the  exception  of  cases 
presented to the prosecutor. 

CEW  Incident  Log,  Form  150  P.D.  -  Each  CEW  activation  will  be  recorded 
whether  the  activation  was  an  actual  deployment  incident,  maintenance  test, 
show of force, or accidental deployment incident.  One line will be completed for 
each  activation  incident.    Several  activations  to  control  the  same  individual  or 
animal  will  be  entered  on  one  line,  with  the  number  of  activations  noted  in  the 
appropriate  column.    The  information  on  the  CEW  Incident  Log  will  also  be 
entered into an on-line form by an on-duty sergeant. 

Adopted by the Board of Police Commissioners this ______ day of ________ 2013. 

Darryl Forté 
Chief of Police 

Alvin Brooks 
Board President 

DISTRIBUTION:  All Department Personnel 

Public View Master Index – Internet 
Department Master Index – Intranet 
Policy Acknowledgement SyStem 

-7- 

