MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

Revised October 20, 2015 
The Patrol Bureau has audit responsibility. 

 
The Long Beach Police Department recognizes that peace, security and detention officers 
respond to dynamic and rapidly evolving enforcement situations that may necessitate the 
use of reasonable force.   
 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
If feasible, a suspect will be warned prior to any use of force that is reasonably likely to 
cause  serious  injury.  Malicious  assaults  or  batteries  committed  by  officers  constitute 
unlawful conduct.  The use of physical force shall be restricted to circumstances specified 
by law when necessary to accomplish a police task successfully. 
 
PC §831(f) – Detention officer authority – A custodial officer may use reasonable force in 
establishing  and  maintaining  custody  of  persons  delivered  to  him  or  her  by  a  law 
enforcement officer. 
 
PC §834(a) – Requires a person being arrested by a peace officer to refrain from using 
force or any weapon to resist such arrest.  
 
PC §835 – An arrest is made by an actual restraint of the person, or by submission to the 
custody  of  an  officer.    The  person  arrested  may  be  subjected  to  such  restraint  as  is 
reasonable for his arrest and detention. 
 
PC §835a – Any peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be 
arrested has committed a public offense may use reasonable force to effect the arrest, to 
prevent escape or to overcome resistance.  
 
A peace officer who makes or attempts to make an arrest need not retreat or desist from 
his  efforts  by  reason  of  the  resistance  or  threatened  resistance  of  the  person  being 
arrested; nor shall such officer be deemed an aggressor or lose his right to self-defense 
by the use of reasonable force to effect the arrest or to prevent escape or to overcome 
resistance. 
 
PC 836.5(b) (a) – Security officer authority – No officer or employee shall be deemed an 
aggressor or lose his or her right to self-defense by the use of reasonable force to effect 
the arrest, prevent escape, or overcome resistance. 
 
PC §841 – The person making the arrest must inform the person  to be arrested of the 
intention  to arrest  him,  of  the  cause of  the  arrest,  and  the  authority  to  make  it,  except 
when the person making the arrest has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be 
arrested is actually engaged in the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, or 
the person to be arrested is pursued immediately after its commission, or after an escape. 
 

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 1 of 7 

MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

The person making the arrest must, on request of the person he is arresting, inform the 
latter of the offense for which he is being arrested. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
Force  is  any  action  to  control  a  subject  or  to  overcome  resistance  through  the  use  of 
physical  strength,  weaponless  defense  techniques,  pain  compliance  techniques, 
defensive weapons or a combination thereof.   
 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
Department personnel will attempt to achieve control through direction, forewarning, or 
reasonable physical force.  Officers are permitted to use only that force necessary, based 
on reasonableness and the totality of circumstances to: 
1)  Effect a lawful investigative detention or arrest; 
2)  Control a resistive, combative or threatening subject; 
3)  Protect themselves, the subject or another person from injury, death or destruction 

of property; and 

4)  Stop a subject who is attempting to flee or escape a lawful detention or arrest. 
 
The reasonableness of a particular use of force will be judged from the perspective of a 
reasonable  officer  possessing  the  same  information,  and  faced  with  the  same 
circumstances as the officer who actually used force. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
The Department utilizes a use of force paradigm, which allows officers to select the level 
of reasonable force necessary to control the situation.  Should an officer use a force option 
outside of department training, the officer must fully articulate the necessity of such force 
and why department trained force options were not utilized. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 
 
A reportable use of force occurs when any officer, in the course and scope of his or her 
employment,  whether  on  or  off  duty,  uses  any  physical  force  upon  a  non-compliant 
person, for purposes other than training.  A reportable use of force includes, but is not 
limited to the following:  
1)  Takedowns 
2) 
Impact weapons  
3)  Chemical agents 
4)  Less lethal systems 
5)  K-9 bites  
6)  Carotid control hold 

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 2 of 7 

MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

7)  Deadly force  
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

 
The following force options are non-reportable: 
1)  Controlling force when there is no complaint of ongoing pain or injury after the force 

Revised October 20, 2015 

a)  Controlling  force  ranges  from  exerting  a  firm  grip  on  a  subject,  to  pain 

compliance control holds, to an actual physical hold or lock; 

2)  Use  of  the  hobble  or expectorant  shield,  when  the  subject  is  compliant  during  its 

has stopped; 

application. 

 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
An employee will immediately notify a supervisor regarding a use of force incident, unless 
exigent circumstances delay the notification.  Employees are responsible for the following: 
1)  All on-duty employees must complete a report detailing the use of force by the end 
of  the  officer's  shift,  unless  exigent  circumstances  prevent  the  officer  from  filing 
his/her own report; 
a)  Any employee that uses force must personally document their actions in a police 

report;   

b)  Any officer not directly involved, but a witness to a reportable use of force will 

have their observations recorded in a police report; 

If an employee is off-duty, out of jurisdiction, and involved in a reportable use of force 
incident, the employee shall notify the Watch Commander as soon as practicable, 
and file a memorandum to their Division Commander articulating the circumstances 
surrounding the use of force incident no later than the end of their next work shift; 
and 
In  all  cases  where  the  carotid  control  hold  has  been  applied,  it  shall  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  employee  using  the  control  hold  to  ensure  that  a  medical 
evaluation is conducted as soon as practicable. 

2) 

3) 

 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
Sergeants may not investigate or approve their own use of force.  After a use of force, a 
supervisor will respond to the scene to evaluate the incident and is responsible for the 
following: 
1)  Review the criminal charges against the subject; 
2)  Ensure that a detailed investigation is conducted surrounding the incident;  
3)  Ensure witnesses are identified and statements obtained; 
4)  Ensure all evidence pertaining to the criminal investigation and use of force has been 

5)  Ensure photographs are taken of all injuries or lack of injuries to the suspect and 

collected; 

employee;  

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 3 of 7 

MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

6)  Notify the Watch Commander of the use of force incident as soon as possible, prior 

to the end of the work shift; 

7)  Notify the on-call Internal Affairs Sergeant on all reportable use of force incidents 
involving potential misconduct or incidents resulting in the subject being admitted to 
the hospital or transported for treatment to a hospital for the following: 
a)  Injuries requiring sutures  
b)  Broken bones 
c)  All head injuries  
d)  Any injury deemed as serious   

8)  Respond to the medical facility where the subject is transported; 
9)  Consider  arranging  for  other  officer(s)  to  transport  and  book  the  subject,  if  the 
subject continues to display hostile or confrontational behavior toward the arresting 
officer(s) 

10)  Direct who will file supplemental reports;  
11)  Review  the  incident/arrest  report and  all  supplemental reports to  the  use of force 

12)  Complete the Supervisor’s Use of Force report via BlueTeam. 

incident; and 

 

The Homicide supervisor will file a Supervisor’s Use of Force Report via BlueTeam on all 
force, including but not limited to, firearms used during an officer involved shooting, an in-
custody death incident, or as determined by the Homicide supervisor.  The investigation 
conducted by Homicide will be used by the Officer Involved Shooting Board to review the 
incident. 
 
During an officer involved shooting or an in-custody death incident, if force other than a 
firearm  was  used,  the  Homicide  Supervisor  will  ensure  a  Supervisor’s  Use  of  Force 
Report is completed via BlueTeam; the supervisory investigation and narrative of the form 
will contain generic information only about the incident.   

 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
Booking  sergeants  will  assist  field  sergeants  with  their  responsibility  to  investigate 
reportable use of force incidents occurring in the Booking area.  This includes the Booking 
tunnel, the main Booking area including the holding cell, jail elevator, and the hallway on 
the fourth floor leading to the Women’s jail from the elevator.   
 
The Booking Sergeant is responsible for the following: 
1)  Ensure  employee(s)  involved  in  the  use  of  force  immediately  notify  their  Field 

Sergeant regarding the use of force; 

2)  Notify the Watch Commander regarding the use of force; 
3)  Assist  the  Field  Sergeant  in  conducting  the  investigation,  including  assisting  with 

interviews of witnesses and involved officers; 

4)  Remain in the Booking area while assisting with the investigation; 
5)  Ensure  any  audio  or  video  evidence  captured  by  the  security  camera  system  is 

reviewed and copied; 

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 4 of 7 

MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

6)  File a supplemental report documenting their actions and observations regarding the 
use of force and make sure they are included in the DR for the incident; and 
7)  Complete the Supervisor’s Use of Force Report via BlueTeam for any use of force 
incidents involving police officers and detention supervisors occurring inside the Jail 
after the prisoner has been released to jail detention officers. 

 

In  use  of  force  incidents  involving  detention  officers,  detention  supervisors  will  file  the 
Supervisor’s Use of Force Report. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 
 
Upon notification of a use of force occurring outside the Long Beach Police Department 
jurisdiction, the Watch Commander will determine whether a supervisor will respond to 
the  scene. The Watch  Commander will evaluate  the  need for further investigation  and 
take appropriate action on all use of force incidents. 
 
When  a  Watch  Commander  is  directly  involved  in  a  use  of  force  incident,  the  Watch 
Commander will direct another supervisor to respond and handle the investigation and 
reports. 
 
The Watch Commander is responsible for the following: 
1)  Review  and  approve  the  incident/arrest  reports,  along  with  all  connecting  reports 

regarding the use of force incident; 

2)  Ensure the incident and level of force used is entered in the Watch Commander’s 

Log; 
  Notify the on-call Internal Affairs Sergeant on all reportable use of force incidents 
involving potential misconduct, or incidents resulting in the subject being admitted to 
the hospital or transported for treatment to a hospital for the following: 
a)  Injuries requiring sutures 
b)  Broken bones 
c)  All head injuries 
d)  Any injury deemed as serious  

4)  Review 

the  Supervisor’s  Use  of  Force  Report  via  BlueTeam,  provide 
recommendations if any, and determine whether the use of force is in or out of policy; 
5)  Forward  the  Supervisor’s  Use  of  Force  Report  via  BlueTeam  to  the  involved 

employee’s Lieutenant within a timely manner. 

3) 

 

Revised October 20, 2015 
 
Review the Supervisor’s Use of Force Report via BlueTeam, provide recommendations if 
any, and determine whether the use of force is in or out of policy. Forward the Supervisor’s 
use of Force Report via BlueTeam to the involved employee’s Commander within a timely 
manner. 
 

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 5 of 7 

MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

Revised October 20, 2015 
 
Review the Supervisor’s Use of Force Report via BlueTeam, provide recommendations if 
any,  and  determine  whether  the  use  of  force  is  in  or  out  of  policy.    Forward  the 
Supervisor’s  Use  of  Force  Report  via  BlueTeam  to  the  involved  employee’s  Bureau 
Deputy Chief within a timely manner. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 
 

the  Supervisor’s  Use  of  Force  Report  via  BlueTeam,  provide 

Review 
final 
recommendations if any, and make a final determination whether the use of force is in or 
out of policy. 
 
The Deputy Chief of the involved employee shall forward the Supervisor’s Use of Force 
Report via BlueTeam to the Internal Affairs Division in a timely manner. 
 
If the use of force was part of a tactical event or unusual occurrence, the Deputy Chief 
will notify the Tactical Operation Committee (TOC) for review. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 
 
Internal Affairs will maintain all Supervisor’s Use of Force reports and ensure compliance 
with any findings or recommendations. 
 

 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
When requested, the Training Section will evaluate the use of force to determine the need 
for future training. 
 

Revised October 20, 2015 

 
When making an arrest, Officers shall strictly observe the laws of arrest and adhere to 
the following provisions: 
1)  The arresting officer shall use only the amount of restraint necessary to assure the 

safe custody of the prisoner and his/her own safety. 

2)  The  arresting  officer  is  responsible  for  the  safety  and  protection  of  the  arrested 

person in his/her custody. 

3)  The arresting officer shall notify Booking Desk personnel or transportation officers, 
if involved, of any injury, apparent illness or other condition which may indicate that 
the arrestee would require any special medical care. 

4)  The  arresting  officer  is  responsible  for  the  security  of  all  personal  property  in  the 
possession  or  under  the  control  of  the  arrestee  at  the  time  of  arrest.    With  the 

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 6 of 7 

MANUAL of the Long Beach Police Department 
 

FIELD OPERATIONS 

exception of vehicles, this responsibility is transferred to Booking Desk personnel or 
transporting officers when they accept custody of the arrestee. 

 

MANUAL OF THE LONG BEACH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
7.1.2 USE OF FORCE 
Page 7 of 7 

