ORLANDO POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURE 
1128.13, RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE AND APPREHENSION TECHNIQUES 

3/14/14 
1128.12 
ALL EMPLOYEES 
TRAINING/ACCREDITATION AND INSPECTIONS SECTION COMMANDER 
4.01, 4.02, 4.04, 4.05, 4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 4.09-4.12, 14.11, 17.03, 29.07, 39.01 
JOHN W. MINA 

 
EFFECTIVE: 
RESCINDS: 
DISTRIBUTION: 
REVIEW RESPONSIBILITY: 
ACCREDITATION STANDARDS: 
CHIEF OF POLICE: 
 
CONTENTS: 

1.  DEFINITIONS 
2.  RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE  
3.  DEADLY FORCE 
4.  RESTRAINING TOOLS 
5.  WEAPONS 
6.  MAINTAINING PROFICIENCY 
7.  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Orlando Police  Department to ensure that all employees utilizing  any level of force including 
deadly force do so within current state law and only use the degree of force necessary to affect lawful objectives. 
(4.01) 
 
PROCEDURES: 

1. DEFINITIONS 

 
Active Resistance: The subject’s actions are intended to facilitate an escape or prevent an arrest. The action is not 
likely to cause injury. 
 
Aggressive Resistance: The subject has battered or is about to batter a person/employee and the subject’s action is 
likely to cause injury. 
 
Approved Weapons and Equipment: Any Department-issued weapons or equipment or personally-owned weapons 
or equipment approved by the appropriate Departmental authority.  
 
Area Treatment: The delivery of a chemical agent to an area, directly or indirectly, to cause people to leave the area 
or deny access to an area. This delivery method does not include delivery directed at a specific subject. 
 
Deadly Force: Any action, by a subject or an employee, that is likely to cause death or great bodily harm. 
 
Deadly Force Resistance: The subject’s actions are likely to cause imminent danger of death or great bodily harm to 
the employee or another person. 
 
Direct Application: The delivery of a chemical agent to a specific person or persons to modify their behavior. 
 
Employee: Any employee of the City of Orlando Police Department (sworn/non-sworn) who has been trained by the 
Department with any approved weapon or equipment, is authorized to carry such approved weapon or equipment, 
and is authorized to use force subject to this policy.  
 
Force: As it relates to this policy, the tactics and/or techniques utilized by an employee to control or regain control of 
a  subject,  in  self-defense,  in  the  defense  of  others,  to  counter  resistance  by  a  subject,  or  when  objectively 
reasonable. 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 2 

 
Forcible  Felony:  Murder,  armed  robbery,  armed  sexual  battery,  arson  or  use  of  explosive  devices  to  a  structure 
occupied or presumed to be occupied, kidnapping, burglary armed with a firearm, and any felony that involves the 
threat of or the use of deadly force against an individual.  
 
Great Bodily Harm: Permanent disfigurement, serious bodily injury, or death. 
 
Hard Control: The employee applies techniques that could result in greater injury to the subject should the subject 
resist their application by the employee.   
 
Imminent Danger: Imminent threat of great bodily harm.   
 
Intensified Techniques: Those techniques necessary to overcome the actions of the subject, short of deadly force. If 
the subject resists or continues to resist these techniques, there is a strong probability of injury being incurred by the 
subject.   
 
Member: Any duly-appointed police officer in the Department.  
 
Objective Reasonableness: The constitutional standard for using any force based upon the totality of circumstances 
(from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene) known to or considered by the employee at the moment 
force is used.  
 
Passive Resistance: The subject fails to obey verbal direction preventing the employee from taking lawful action. 
 
Soft  Control:  The  employee  applies  techniques  that  have  a  minimal  potential  for  injury  to  the  subject  should  the 
subject resist the technique.   
 
The  "Response  to  Resistance  Continuum”  (Appendix  A):  A  training  guide  to  assist  employees  in  determining  the 
force  that  may  be  objectively  reasonable.  It  takes  into  consideration  the  resistance  that  may  be  encountered, 
responsive techniques, and other factors or special circumstances.  
 
Totality of Circumstances: The various factors known to or considered by an employee at the time law enforcement 
action was taken.  
 

2. RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE  

 
An  employee  who  must  respond  to  resistance  by  using  some  form  of  force  shall  use  objective  reasonableness  in 
determining the amount of force to use to effectively control the subject(s) during a lawful seizure or arrest. Objective 
reasonableness is based upon the totality of circumstances known to or considered by the employee at the moment 
force was used and may include, but is not limited to, severity of crime; whether the subject is an immediate threat to 
the safety of the employee or any individual; whether the subject is resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by 
flight; the number of subjects and employees involved; the size, age, and condition of employees and subjects; the 
duration of the police action; injury; known violent history of any subject; known or suspected use of intoxicants by 
subject;  known  or  apparent  mental  or  psychological  condition(s);  environmental  factors;  and  any  other  factor  or 
circumstances that may be relevant to the response to resistance that is known to or considered by the employee at 
the time such force is applied (refer to Appendix A “Response to Resistance Continuum”).      
 
The  “Response  to  Resistance  Continuum  Guideline”  provides  a  training  guide  to  assist  employees  in  determining 
their  response  to  meet  the  resistance  encountered  by  a  subject.  This  “Response  to  Resistance  Continuum”  is  a 
guideline only; every response to resistance is unique to its own circumstances. The Continuum Guideline shall not 
limit  the  employee’s  response  or  permit  greater  response  than  objectively  reasonable  under  the  totality  of 
circumstances. 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 3 

 
All  non-sworn  employees  who  must  use  some  form  of  force  shall  do  so  for  self-defense  purposes  only.  The  non-
sworn  employee(s)  shall  immediately  call  for  additional  members  and  shall  not  attempt  to  affect  an  arrest.  When 
possible, the non-sworn employee will leave the area and allow responding members to affect the arrest. 
 
An employee who has used force on a subject shall immediately notify a supervisor. The employee must monitor the 
affected subject for breathing irregularities and level of consciousness. The employee must call OFD if there is any 
sign  or  reason  to  believe  that  a  subject’s  condition  is  deteriorating,  and  will  provide  aid  until  relieved  by  medical 
authorities. In the event that multiple employees used force on a subject, then one employee shall be designated to 
monitor the subject until medical personnel arrive. (4.09) 
 

3. DEADLY FORCE 

 
An employee is justified in the use of deadly force only when he or she reasonably believes such force is necessary 
to prevent imminent danger of death or great bodily harm to the employee or any individual; or when the employee 
has probable cause to believe a subject is committing or has committed a forcible felony (as outlined in this directive) 
and the subject’s actions, to include escape, pose imminent danger to any individual if apprehension is delayed. 
 
Deadly force shall not be used when there is a likelihood of serious injury being inflicted upon persons other than the 
individual against whom the member is authorized to use deadly force. The safeguarding of other human lives shall 
outweigh all other considerations. 
 
Any employee whose actions result in death or serious bodily injury to another person will be temporarily relieved 
from duty until a preliminary administrative review is conducted. Upon clearance from EAP, the employee’s division 
commander may grant additional time off in a relief of duty status for reasons related to the death or serious bodily 
injury of another person caused by the employee. Refer to the current issue of P&P 1604, Discipline, and the current 
issue of P&P 1617, Relief of Duty, Alternative Duty, and Limited Duty, for additional information. (4.11) 
 

4. RESTRAINING TOOLS 

 
Only restraining tools meeting Agency approval are to be used in the performance of an employee’s duty (both on 
and off duty). Subjects shall be restrained in a manner so as not to injure themselves or any individual. 
 
4.1  HANDCUFFS  
Members responsible for the custody and safe handling and transporting of subjects are strongly urged to utilize their 
Department-issued handcuffs as a primary restraining device. Subjects should be handcuffed to ensure the security 
of and prevent injury to the subject. The handcuffs should be double-locked, behind the subject’s back. Consideration 
may be given to a subject’s age, physical condition or disability, and mental capacity with regard to the decision to 
utilize handcuffs. In the event the decision is made not to handcuff a subject, another member should be assigned to 
assist in transporting the subject to the final destination. (29.07) 
 
Members shall maintain physical control over any handcuffed subject to ensure the safety of the subject and other 
individuals,  including  the  member.  Non-compliance  of  a  handcuffed  subject  shall  be  handled  in  a  manner  that  is 
objectively reasonable under the circumstances. 
 
Subjects may only be handcuffed to a fixed object designed for temporary restraint when it is necessary to protect 
any individual from harm or in completion of the member’s duties (i.e., booking procedures, medical). (39.01d) 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 4 

FLEXCUFFS 

 
4.2 
Members may use flexcuffs in lieu of handcuffs when appropriate. Subjects should be flexcuffed in such a manner as 
to ensure the security of and prevent injury to the subject. (29.07) Flexcuffs shall be removed using flexcuff cutters, 
which  are  available  in  the  Quartermaster  Unit,  CID,  patrol  cars,  and  the  Patrol  off-going  squad  room.  In  cases  of 
emergency  only,  flexcuffs  may  be  removed  with  other  cutting  instruments.  When  using  other  cutting  instruments, 
extra care should be given to removal of the flexcuffs to ensure that injury does not occur to the subject during the 
removal process. (39.01d) 
 
4.3  RIPP-HOBBLE 
Members  may  use  a  Ripp-Hobble  as  an  additional  restraining  tool.  Most  often  the  Ripp-Hobble  will  be  utilized  in 
applying  a  four-point  restraint.  Subjects  should  be  Ripp-Hobbled  in  such  a  manner  as  to  ensure  security  of  and 
prevent injury to the subject. Ripp-Hobbles are available in patrol vehicles for members’ use. (29.07) 
 
4.4 
When a subject resists and  creates  an imminent  danger to the subject, member,  or  any individual, members may 
utilize a four-point restraint. A four-point restraint is the securing of the subject’s feet to his or her hands from the rear, 
using handcuffs, flexcuff, and/or a Ripp-Hobble.  
 
When  it  is  necessary  to  utilize  a  four-point  restraint  on  a  subject,  members  shall  not  “cinch”  down  the  handcuffs, 
flexcuffs, or Ripp-Hobble. The feet should not be brought past a 90-degree angle to the body. This ensures the safest 
method of utilizing this restraint technique.  
 
Two  members  should  transport  a  four-point-restrained  subject  for  member  and  subject  safety,  whenever  possible. 
The member shall monitor the subject at all times while in a four-point restraint. 
 

FOUR-POINT RESTRAINT 

5. WEAPONS 

 
Only weapons (lethal and non-lethal) and ammunition meeting Agency approval are to be used in the performance of 
an employee’s duty (both on and off duty). (4.05a) Employees are restricted from carrying any weapon (lethal and 
non-lethal) for which they have not proven proficiency. (4.05b, 4.07) A record on each approved firearm, Department 
or personally owned, will be maintained by the Training Unit. (4.06a,c) Furthermore, Department employees shall not 
carry any weapons (lethal or non-lethal) that have not been authorized, reviewed, inspected, and approved by proper 
authority.  (4.06a,  4.07a)  The  Department  Range  Master  will  review,  inspect  and  approve  all  firearms.  (4.06a)  If  a 
Department  firearm  is  deemed  unsafe  by  the  Range  Master,  he  or  she  will  ensure  that  the  firearm  is  repaired  or 
properly disposed/destroyed. (4.06b) The Department Range Master will maintain a list of all approved firearms and 
ammunition (both on and off duty). (4.06) A record on each approved firearm, Department or personally owned, will 
be  maintained  by  the  Training  Unit.  (4.06c)  All  employees  who  carry  weapons  will  be  issued  copies  of,  and  be 
instructed  on,  the  Agency’s  Response  to  Resistance  policy  before  they  are  assigned  and  authorized  to  carry  the 
weapon.  (4.02)  A  list  of  approved  non-lethal  weapons  may  be  obtained  from  the  Training  Section  commander. 
(4.07b) Supervisors will inspect and document, on a yearly basis, the condition of all non-lethal weapons carried by 
their  employees  and  ensure  that  expiration  dates  are  not  exceeded.  Each  employee  should  also  ensure  that  the 
expiration  dates  of  their  non-lethal  weapons  are  not  exceeded.  (4.07c)  NOTE:  A  common  pocket  knife  is  not 
considered a weapon for purposes of this policy.   
 
5.1  CHEMICAL AGENTS  
Department-issued  chemical  agents  may  be  used  when  necessary  to  stop  passive  or  greater  resistance.  The 
purpose of the chemical agent is to minimize the potential threat of resistance by the subject. Chemical agents will 
cause burning and tearing of the eyes, heavy discharge from the nose, difficulty in breathing, disorientation, panic, 
and uncontrollable sneezing. The appropriate use of a chemical agent without injury and when spray is the sole tactic 
used  will  require  an  incident  report  and/or  charging  affidavit  and  completion  of  the  Chemical  Agent  Short  Form 
(Attachment A). 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 5 

 
Chemical agents should only be used in a direct application in those situations in which an arrest is likely. If an arrest 
is not made, the watch commander shall be notified as soon as possible and an Incident Report shall be completed 
concerning the incident. 
 
Authorized employees will be trained in the use of chemical agents prior to its issuance. The Training Section will be 
required to maintain proficiency training records.  
 
All employees in uniform authorized to carry an approved chemical agent shall carry that agent while performing on-
duty or extra-duty work assignments. Members who wear plain clothes and members in limited-duty status shall carry 
their approved chemical agent, concealed, while performing their assigned duties. Members may carry their chemical 
agent in an off-duty status. Non-sworn employees shall not carry their chemical agent in an off-duty status. (4.05a)  
 
5.1.1  CLEAR OUT 
“Clear Out” is a non-lethal, non-flame-creating chemical irritant that is contained in an aerosol canister and has the 
same effects as chemical agents. Clear Out is designed to force a subject from a confined area or to disperse large 
crowds.  It  is  to  be  used  when  verbal  methods  of  persuasion  have  failed  and  there  is  an  anticipated  danger  to 
members if Clear Out is not used to extract the person(s). The authorization to use Clear Out shall be given by a 
watch commander, incident commander, or higher authority.  
 
The  decision  to  use  Clear  Out  may  be  based  on  the  physical  sighting  of  a  subject  in  a  structure,  on  eyewitness 
statements to the fact that  a  subject was sighted  in the structure, or  any other information that establishes a  high 
degree  of  likelihood  that  a  subject  is  inside,  e.g.,  Sonitrol.  The  subject  must  be  offered  an  exit,  not  “locked”  in  a 
structure. It may be necessary to utilize two or more cans in a structure. Allow sufficient time (at least five minutes) 
for the gas to expand throughout the structure. If the subject has not exited the structure, the watch commander will 
determine how to secure the structure.  
 
Clear Out may also be used in accordance to P&P 1302, Civil Disturbances. 
 
5.1.2   PYROTECHNIC GRENADES 
A  pyrotechnic  grenade  is  a  device  that  releases  a  chemical  agent  into  the  atmosphere  through  the  burning  of  a 
chemical  compound.  The 
types  of  chemical  agents  available  are  smoke  (HC)  and  CS  (Orthochloro-
benzalmalononitrile). The grenade burns at 750-800 degrees Fahrenheit and is specially designed for outdoor use in 
crowd control situations only. Pyrotechnic grenades shall not be deployed onto rooftops, into crawl spaces, or indoors 
due  to  its  fire-producing  capability.  The  grenades  shall  be  used  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  dispersing  illegally-
assembled crowds or to protect lives and property when the circumstances indicate that the use of these chemical or 
pyrotechnic agents are the most effective manner of accomplishing the objective. Smoke grenades may be used to 
determine  wind  direction,  as  a  carrier  agent  for  CS  munitions,  or  to  conceal  the  movements  of  mobile  field  force 
personnel. 
 
The  use  of  pyrotechnic  grenades  will  only  be  done  with  the  authorization  of  the  incident  commander,  watch 
commander,  or  higher  authority.  The  incident  or  watch  commander  will  establish  the  protocol  or  parameters  in 
advance concerning the extraordinary use of chemical agents in accordance with a Level 1 Mobile Field Force event 
in the Department’s current issue of P&P 1302, Civil Disturbances. 
 
Only those members who have completed the Department-approved training will be permitted to deploy pyrotechnic 
grenades. The incident or watch commander should have Communications check all channels for any on-duty ERT 
Chemical  Team  grenadier(s)  to  respond  since  they  have  specialized  training  and  may  have  a  variety  of  chemical 
munitions readily available. 
 
Chemical munitions packs are located in the Quartermaster vault at OPH and SECPO. These packs must be signed 
out  with  the  approval  of  the  watch  commander.  The  Patrol  Services  Bureau  commander  or  designee  will  be 
responsible for chemical munitions packs. 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 6 

 
5.2  ELECTRONIC CONTROL DEVICES (ECD) 
An ECD is an electronic device that transmits electrical impulses to override the central nervous system that controls 
the  skeletal  muscles.  It  is  designed  to  incapacitate  a  target  from  a  distance  without  causing  death  or  permanent 
injury. The TASER M26 and X26 are the electronic control devices approved by the Department. 
 
Members may not carry a TASER unless it has first been reviewed, inspected, and approved by the Department’s 
lead  TASER  instructor.  (4.06a)  Members  shall  complete  the  Department’s  training  course  and  demonstrate 
proficiency prior to carrying the TASER. (4.05b) Members may carry their assigned TASER while off duty. While off 
duty, the TASER must be concealed and carried in an approved holster. Non-sworn employees are not authorized to 
carry the TASER. (4.05a) 
 
The TASER is a less-lethal weapon and is not intended to replace the firearm as the primary tool used when there is 
a potential for the use of deadly force. The purpose of using the TASER is to stop active resistance or as objectively 
reasonable under the circumstances. The TASER probes shall not be intentionally aimed at a person’s head, neck, 
chest  (above  the  nipples),  or  groin  unless  intensified  techniques  or  deadly  force  is  warranted.  The  TASER  “drive 
stun” technique is approved in all areas except the head, neck and groin as hard control for active resistance. The 
Taser  shall  not  be  used  on  a  subject  who  is  holding  illegal  drugs  in  his/her  mouth  when  the  sole  method  of  their 
resistance  is  the  refusal  to  spit  the  illegal  drugs  out  of  their  mouth.  The  TASER  shall  not  be  used  on  subjects 
operating bicycles or motor vehicles except in cases of aggressive resistance. 
 
In cases where a subject is struck with a probe in the face, throat, groin, female breast, or male nipple area, OFD 
must respond to the scene to treat the injury. (4.09) However, OFD will not be responsible for removing probes. The 
subject,  when  struck  in  any  of  these  areas,  must  be  transported  to  a  hospital  for  probe  removal.  Only  members 
certified to use a TASER are authorized to remove probes that have struck the subject in any area other than those 
listed  above.  TASER  probes  should  be  removed  as  soon  as  the  member  determines  the  potential  for  further 
resistance  has subsided. Since the TASER probes  are  a biohazard, they must be treated as such. Consequently, 
latex gloves must be used when removing TASER probes. The probes must be packaged as evidence in accordance 
with the current issue of P&P 1301, Significant Exposure and Control Plan. 
 
Digital  photographs  will  be  taken  of  the  location  where  the  TASER  probes  struck  the  body.  Employees  taking 
photographs of subjects must do so out of public view if the probes strike private areas of the subject’s body. 
 
The air cartridge number used will be entered on the Response to Resistance Form in the appropriate block and the 
spent air cartridge will be submitted into evidence. Managers approving replacement cartridges must ensure that the 
circumstances  surrounding  the  discharging  of  a  TASER  are  properly  documented.  Replacement  air  cartridges,  for 
used or damaged air cartridges, will be issued by the Quartermaster Unit with a requisition signed by a member with 
the rank of Lieutenant or above. 
 
No  changes,  alterations,  modifications,  or  substitutions  shall  be  made  to  the  TASER.  An  authorized  vendor  shall 
make all repairs to the TASER. Any TASER that is not functioning properly shall be deadlined in the Quartermaster 
Unit.    
 
The Training Section will be responsible for tracking TASER data port information annually during Block Training. In 
the event of a questionable discharge, or one that leads to serious injury or death, the TASER’s data port information 
will be downloaded as soon as possible. 
 
In the event of an accidental discharge where there are no reported injuries, a Response to Resistance Form will not 
be needed; however, a supervisor must be notified of an accidental discharge and ensure that the Incident Report is 
completed. The spent air cartridge will be placed into Property and Evidence. The supervisor will forward a copy of 
the Incident Report to the Internal Affairs Unit where it will be retained on file. 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 7 

IMPACT WEAPONS 

 
5.3 
5.3.1  BATON 
The  baton  is  the  primary  police  impact  weapon.  Members  shall  complete  the  Department’s  training  course  and 
demonstrate proficiency prior to carrying the baton. The Department-approved baton shall be carried by members on 
their  person  while  in  uniform.    Members  in  plain  clothes  may  carry  their  batons  concealed  when  working  on  duty, 
extra-duty, or when off duty. (4.05a) 
 
The purpose of using the baton is to stop active resistance or as objectively reasonable under the circumstances. 
Using  the  baton  to  target  the  shaded  areas  (Appendix  B)  below  the  shoulders  shall  be  in  response  to  aggressive 
resistance or deadly force. Using the baton to target the head or neck shall be in response to deadly force resistance 
only.   
 
The flashlight  is designed to  be used  as  an illumination device. Its  use  as  a  defensive impact instrument shall  be 
prohibited  except in cases of aggressive resistance when the baton is not practical. If the flashlight is used  as an 
impact instrument, the same techniques set forth in this policy with respect to the use of the baton shall apply. 
 
5.3.2  SAGE SL6 
The SAGE SL6 is a secondary police impact weapon. Only members who have completed the Department-approved 
SAGE SL6 training class and demonstrated proficiency may utilize this weapon. (4.05b) Members trained/certified to 
carry and deploy the SAGE SL6 shall inspect their designated weapon prior to each tour of duty. SAGE SL6 shall not 
be used or carried in an off-duty status. (4.05a) 
 
The  purpose  of  using  the  SAGE  SL6  is  to  stop  active  resistance  or  as  objectively  reasonable  under  the 
circumstances.  Using  the  SAGE  SL6  to  target  the  shaded  areas  (Appendix  B)  below  the  shoulders  shall  be  in 
response  to  aggressive  resistance  or  deadly  force.  Using  the  SAGE  SL6  to  target  the  head  or  neck  shall  be  in 
response to deadly force resistance only. 
 
The SAGE SL6 may also be used in situations where the baton or other control techniques are impractical or unsafe. 
When practical, every effort will be made by members deploying the SAGE SL6 to inform other employees prior to 
firing. 
 
The use of SAGE SL6 is authorized against animals that pose a threat to public or employee safety. 
 
5.4 
Members of the Department may discharge an approved firearm only under the following circumstances:  
 

FIREARMS 

a.  When the member reasonably believes the subject poses imminent danger of death or great bodily harm to 

an employee or any individual. 

b.  When the member has probable cause to believe a subject is committing or has committed a forcible felony 
(as outlined in this directive) and the subject’s actions, to include escape, pose imminent danger of death or 
great bodily harm if apprehension is delayed. 

c.  For firearm practice at an approved gun range. 
d.  For the purposes of test firing. 
e.  To give an alarm or to call for assistance, for an important purpose when no other means is possible and the 

f.  To kill a dangerous animal or one that humane consideration requires release from further suffering, when 

round may be fired safely into the ground. 

no other means of disposition is available.  

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 8 

 

 

 

g.  Discharging a firearm at or toward a moving motor vehicle is dangerous, can be ineffective, and should only 
be  considered  as  a  last  resort  to  protect  the  member  or  another  from  imminent  danger  of  death  or  great 
bodily harm. Members shall not discharge a firearm at a moving vehicle without first evaluating the particular 
conditions  as  a  means  to  assess  the  risk  of  injuring  or  killing  person(s)  against  whom  force  is  not  being 
directed. Discharging a firearm shall be avoided when there is an unreasonable risk to the safety of persons 
other than the intended subject or the danger to the public outweighs the likely benefits of its use. The use 
of deadly force by discharging a firearm at/into moving vehicle is authorized only when: 
1.  The member has probable cause to believe the occupant of the vehicle poses imminent danger with a 

firearm or fires upon a member or another person, or 

 

2.  The member has probable cause to believe an occupant is using the vehicle in a manner that poses 
imminent  danger  of  death  or  great  bodily  harm  to  the  member  or  to  any  individual  and  there  is  no 
reasonable avenue of escape for the intended victim. 

h.  Members may not use deadly force to apprehend escapees or other wanted individuals based solely on the 

individual’s original charges or convictions. 

a.  Firing into or over the heads of crowds. 
b.  Firing warning shots. (4.04) 
c.  Firing into buildings, enclosures, or through doors when a subject is not visible. 
d.  Firing at a moving vehicle solely to disable the vehicle unless authorized by a commander. 
e.  Cocking the hammer of a weapon except to improve aim immediately prior to firing.  
f.  Firing from a moving vehicle, unless being fired upon. 

 
5.4.1  PROHIBITIONS 
The following practices are strictly forbidden:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.4.2  HANDGUNS 
The Department-approved handgun may be utilized when a member perceives imminent danger to the member or 
any individual. 
 
When the handgun is outside the holster in a tactical situation, the weapon shall be pointed down at a 45-degree 
angle  (ready  gun  position)  or  indexed  down  with  the  muzzle  pointed  in  a  safe  direction;  trigger  finger  outside  the 
trigger guard, until there is a need to fire or the member is at risk. 
 
5.4.3  SHOULDER-FIRED WEAPONS (SHOTGUNS, AR-15s, MP-5s and others) 
Shoulder-fired weapons are to be considered supplemental weapons and may be utilized in those situations where 
the trained/certified members deem such use necessary and prudent.  
 
Some factors to be considered when deciding on the use or deployment of shoulder-fired weapons are: 
 

 
a.  Whether deadly force is appropriate in the situation. 
b.  Shoulder-fired weapons are, by design, more accurate than the handgun.  
c.  Most shoulder-fired weapons have lights mounted on them for use in low-light areas. 
d.  The probability of hitting an intended target is much higher when using a shoulder-fired weapon. 

 
Some factors that might make carrying a shoulder-fired weapon impractical are: 
 

 
a.  Foot pursuits. 
b.  Close quarters where maneuvering with the weapon is a disadvantage. 
c.  Climbing over obstacles where controlling the weapon may prove difficult. 

 
Shotguns and AR-15 rifles shall not be placed in the vehicle weapon rack with a round in the chamber. 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 9 

 
Only members who have completed Department-approved shoulder-fired weapon training classes and demonstrated 
proficiency  may  utilize  these  weapons.  (4.05b)  Members  trained/certified  to  carry  and  deploy  the  shoulder-fired 
weapons shall inspect their designated weapons prior to each tour of duty. Shoulder-fired weapons shall not be used 
or carried in an off-duty status. (4.05a) 
 
5.5 
Tire deflation devices such as Stop Sticks, Piranha, Terminator, Barracuda and Road Spike are devices comparable 
to a Hard Control response to Active Resistance on the Response to Resistance Continuum.  
 
5.5.1  STOP STICKS 
The deployment of Stop Sticks will be based on the following: 

TIRE DEFLATION DEVICES 

a.  Felony vehicles – the decision to deploy Stop Sticks will be at the discretion of any member who can safely 

deploy the device, excluding the sole charge of felony “Fleeing and Eluding.”  

b.  Misdemeanor vehicles – Stop Stick deployment requires the approval of a supervisor or manager. 

 
As a reminder, once the driver of a subject vehicle that has been “Stop Sticked” takes evasive action in an effort to 
distance  him-  or  herself  from  the  police,  the  member  shall  immediately  discontinue  following  the  vehicle  unless  it 
meets the criteria for a vehicle pursuit as described in the current issue of OPD P&P 1120, Vehicle Pursuits. 
 
Furthermore, any subsequent use of Stop Sticks after the first attempt to stop the vehicle with this device must be 
approved by a supervisor, except in a situation that meets vehicle pursuit criteria. 
 
The use of tire deflation devices requires the documentation on a Response to Resistance Form (Section 7.1). 
 
Only members who are trained by the Training Unit in the use of Stop Sticks will deploy/activate them. 
 
Members  must  make  every  effort  to  avoid  collateral  damage  to  citizens’  property  that  could  result  from  the  target 
vehicle’s impact with tire deflation devices. 
 
When deploying Stop Sticks on a roadway as a part of a pursuit, the deploying member will notify Communications of 
the  intended  location  and  specific  lanes  of  travel  targeted  for  deployment.  Communications  will  notify  units  and 
agencies involved in the pursuit, as well as the on-duty watch commander. 
 
Before deploying Stop Sticks on roadways, members must accomplish the following: 
 

a.  Select a location with minimal anticipated and actual pedestrian and bystander presence. 
b.  Position  employees  and  bystanders  in  a  safe  location  away  from  the  point  of  impact  and  potential  flying 

debris. 

 
NOTE: Stop Sticks will not be deployed on motorcycles or bicycles. 
 
When  used  in  a  pursuit,  members  other  than  those  operating  the  primary  and  secondary  pursuit  vehicles  will  be 
responsible for deployment of Stop Sticks and should deploy the devices in the roadway ahead of the target vehicle 
they are attempting to stop. 
 
Position Stop Sticks to minimize the ability of the target vehicle to avoid or evade the device. 
 
Deploy Stop Sticks as a single unit or in combination of two or more sets depending on the width of the roadway to 
be covered and available time to deploy them. 
 
Assisting employees will prevent traffic from entering the target roadway and redirect traffic on the target roadway 
away from the deployment area. 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 10 

 
Deploying and assisting members can use patrol vehicles to channel the fleeing vehicle toward the path of the Stop 
Sticks provided the following: 
 

a.  Emergency equipment is activated. 
b.  At least two traffic lanes are available for the target vehicle and pursuing members without crossing a grass 

or elevated concrete median. 

c.  Members have exited their patrol vehicles and assumed a safe position. 

 
Deploying members should immediately remove Stop Sticks from the roadway when no further need for deployment 
exists and it is safe to do so. 
 
The  assigned  supervisor  will  ensure  that  a  Tire  Deflation  Device  Deployment  Reporting  Form  (Attachment  B)  is 
completed and turned in to the Quartermaster Unit with the damaged Stop Sticks by the end of their tour of duty. 
 
5.5.2  PIRANHA, TERMINATOR, BARRACUDA, AND ROAD SPIKE 
These tire deflation devices may be used by specialized units (i.e., MBI, DED, TAC, SOD) or Patrol members as a 
pursuit prevention measure for stationary vehicles or vehicles traveling less than 25 miles per hour (speed limit does 
not apply to Road Spike). They may be used for the following: 
 

a.  Control driver’s license/DUI checkpoints. 
b.  Suspect surveillance. 
c.  Buy/Bust drug operations. 
d.  Warrant service. 
e.  Other situations where the movement of a stationary vehicle must be prevented. 

 
Only members who are trained by the Training Unit in the use of the listed tire deflation devices will deploy/activate 
them. 
 
5.6  DYNAMIC VEHICLE TAKEDOWN 
Dynamic  Vehicle  Takedowns  are  pre-planned  coordinated  efforts  utilizing  multiple  vehicles  and  members  who  are 
trained in this tactic to “block” a vehicle and arrest a felony suspect. Dynamic vehicle takedowns are used on suspect 
vehicles that are stationary (parked in a parking lot, stopped at an intersection) and should not be used on moving 
vehicles or for routine traffic stops. The dynamic vehicle takedown, or any modified version of this technique, shall 
only  be  used  by  members  who  have  been  trained  and  who  receive  continuous  training  in  this  technique  and  are 
assigned to DED, Patrol TAC, MBI, FIU, the Gang Unit and SWAT. 
 
5.7  VEHICLE BLOCK 
Blocking a vehicle on a traffic stop is a tactic sometimes used to prevent a vehicle from fleeing. Blocking may only be 
used on a suspect vehicle when the member believes that the suspect vehicle may attempt to flee. This tactic may 
only be used during a traffic stop using emergency equipment. Once the emergency equipment has been activated, 
position  the  primary  patrol  vehicle  behind  the  suspect  vehicle.  When  the  suspect  vehicle  comes  to  a  stop,  the 
secondary patrol vehicle may pull in front of the suspect vehicle blocking its path. Members should communicate with 
each other and confirm that this tactic will be used. Blocking may not be used on moving vehicles. 
 

6. MAINTAINING PROFICIENCY  

 
Employees shall maintain and demonstrate proficiency with Department-authorized techniques, restraining tools, and 
weapons  as  determined  by  the  Training/Accreditation  and  Inspections  Section  commander.  Less-lethal  weapon 
training  will  be  conducted  annually  on  the  following  less-lethal  weapons:  ASP  baton,  chemical  agent,  Sage  SL6. 
(14.11d,e) 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 11 

 
Firearms training will be conducted at least twice annually subject to the terms of any applicable collective bargaining 
provision.  (14.11b)  The  Training  Unit  shall  be  responsible  for  establishing  standards  of  proficiency,  ensuring 
compliance by all members, and maintaining proficiency records. 
 
Failure of an employee to demonstrate and maintain acceptable standards of proficiency shall be cause for remedial 
training. Remedial training shall be coordinated with the Training Unit and shall be completed within seven days. An 
employee’s  continued  inability  to  maintain  proficiency  standards  shall  cause  the  employee  to  be  placed  on  an 
alternative assignment pending a final determination as to their job fitness, in accordance with the current issue of 
P&P 1617, Relief of Duty, Alternative Duty, and Limited Duty. 
 
Employees who are unable to participate in training and/or evaluation sessions that qualify them to carry weapons 
and employ force (e.g., during an extended leave of absence, physical disability, etc.) shall be restricted as to their 
use of police authority in accordance with the current issue of P&P 1619, Restricted Duty Assignments, or the current 
issue of P&P 1617, Relief of Duty, Alternative Duty, and Limited Duty. Prior to resuming full duty status, employees 
must demonstrate proficiency in all areas, to the satisfaction of the Training Unit. (4.05b) 
 

7. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

 
Once a response to resistance has occurred, the involved employee will notify his or her immediate supervisor as 
soon as possible. If it occurs during an extra-duty work assignment or off duty, an on-duty supervisor will be notified 
to conduct the investigation. In those instances where the involved employee is a supervisor, another uninvolved on-
duty sergeant will be notified to conduct the investigation. 
 
Once notified, the supervisor shall respond to the scene as soon as possible and interview all involved employees, 
witnesses, and subjects. (17.03) The supervisor will be responsible for reviewing and obtaining copies of all reports, 
affidavits, witness statements, and available video and audio recordings for inclusion in the Response to Resistance 
package. 
 
Employees who have used a technique or weapon requiring a Response to Resistance investigation shall complete 
an Incident Report by the end of their tour of duty, except in misdemeanor cases where the use of chemical agent is 
the  sole  response  to  resistance  and  there  are  no  injuries  claimed  or  evident.  (4.08c)  Supervisors  will  ensure  that 
these reports are completed within the prescribed timeframe.  
 
The supervisor shall notify the involved employee’s section commander of the circumstances requiring the initiation 
of a Response to Resistance report. If the employee’s section commander is not on duty and immediately available, 
the supervisor will notify the on-duty watch commander. Notifications shall be accomplished as soon as possible but 
no  later  than  the  end  of  their  tour  of  duty,  and  the  name  of  the  manager  notified  shall  be  documented  in  the 
Response to Resistance Form (Attachment C).  
 
7.1  RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE FORMS 
A supervisor shall complete a Response to Resistance Form under the following circumstances: (4.08 b, c) 
 
(NOTE: A sworn supervisor shall complete Response to Resistance Forms for CSOs and CSIs.) 
 

a.  Use of chemical agent with injury or accompanied with second tactic. (4.08b) 
b.  Use of tire deflation devices. 
c.  Use of impact weapons (baton, SAGE SL6, etc.). (4.08b) 
d.  K-9 dog bites, other than accidental. (4.08c) 
e.  Use of electronic control devices (TASER). (4.08b) 
f.  Forearm/knee/open and closed hand strikes. (4.08c) 
g.  Kicks. 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 12 

 

h.  Use  of  any  technique  or  the  application  of  any  weapon  that  results  in  actual  or  claimed  (evident  or  non-

i.  Use of  chemical  agent without claimed  or  evident  injury (excluding the  effects  of the  chemical agent) will 

evident) injury. (4.08b) 

require a Chemical Agent Short Form. 

 
(NOTE: When  a firearm  is  discharged,  or  an employee applies  any technique or weapon that results in  death,  an 
Initial Notice of Inquiry shall be generated in lieu of the Response to Resistance Form. The only exception is when an 
employee utilized deadly force in the killing of a dangerous animal or one that humane consideration requires release 
from further suffering, when no other means of disposition is available. In this case the employee shall complete an 
Incident Report in lieu of an Initial Notice of Inquiry or Response to Resistance Form. (4.08a) 
 
The supervisor shall ensure that photographs are taken of any injury, actual or claimed, by either the subject or the 
employee, that result from an application of force by the employee in response to a subject’s resistance. If available, 
a CSI or forensic photographer will take the photographs of all injuries requiring hospitalization and/or treatment at a 
medical  facility.  If  no  CSI  or  forensic  photographer  is  available,  a  supervisor,  with  the  permission  of  a  watch 
commander,  will  take  the  photographs,  which  shall  be  maintained  in  accordance  with  standard  policies  regarding 
crime  scene  photos.  In  those  instances  where  the  assigned  supervisor  photographs  the  injury,  the  supervisor  will 
only utilize a digital camera. The photographs will document the reported injury as well as the overall condition and/or 
appearance of the subject. All employees capturing digital images must adhere to the current issue of Departmental 
P&P 1902, Digital Cameras. Photographs that have been processed or archived through the Forensic Imaging Unit 
do not need to be attached to the Response to Resistance package.   
 
The Response to Resistance Form is structured except for the narrative section. The supervisor shall separate the 
employees involved into two categories: Principal employees and assisting employees.  
 
A principal employee is any employee who encounters physical resistance or force from a subject and must use a 
technique or weapon to overcome it. 
 
Assisting  employees  shall  be  listed  and  are  defined  as  those  using  controlling  techniques  or  restraint  holds  while 
assisting the principal employee. 
 
The narrative portion is to be completed by the supervisor and should include:  
 

a.  A  statement  indicating  a  review  of  a  charging  affidavit  and/or  incident  report  for  probable  cause  or 

reasonable suspicion. 

b.  The specific resistance the employee encountered and the specific response of the employee. 
c.  Employee/subject factors and special circumstances 
d.  How the injuries were incurred and a description of the extent of the injuries. This includes both employees 

and subjects.   

policy.  

e.  Synopsis of witness and subject statements, if any. 
f.  Statement indicating if video and/or audio was reviewed and/or saved as evidence. 
g.  A statement by the supervisor indicating whether the employee’s response was in keeping with Department 

 
(NOTE: The Response to Resistance Form is not a substitute for an internal investigation. An INOI shall be initiated 
for  disapproved  Response  to  Resistance  Forms  by  Internal  Affairs.  If  the  supervisor  determines  that  an  inquiry  is 
necessary, it is his or her responsibility to initiate the INOI.) 
 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 13 

 
The  reporting  supervisor  shall  forward  the  Response  to  Resistance  package  to  the  involved  employee’s  chain  of 
command  by  the  end  of  their  tour  of  duty,  unless  such  time  is  extended  by  a  commander.  After  the  involved 
employee’s  section  commander  and  division  commander  review  the  Response  to  Resistance  package,  it  will  be 
forwarded  to  the  In-Service  Training  Unit  supervisor.  Upon  review  by  the  In-Service  Training  Unit  supervisor,  the 
Response  to  Resistance  package  will  be  forwarded  to  the  Training/Accreditations  and  Inspections  Section 
commander  and  then  through  the  involved  employee’s  bureau  commanders.  Upon  final  review  by  the  bureau 
commander, the Response to Resistance package shall be forwarded to the Internal Affairs Section for review and 
filing. Each person who receives the Response to Resistance package shall review, evaluate, and either approve or 
disapprove  the  appropriateness  of  the  techniques  and  tactics  used.  If  the  person  disapproves  the  Response  to 
Resistance  package,  they  shall  attach  a  dissent  prior  to  forwarding  through  the  chain  of  command.  Any 
recommendations by the Training Unit shall be forwarded to the affected division commander. (4.10)  
 
Supervisors shall review Response to Resistance files of their assigned employees as directed by Internal Affairs. 
Reviews  will  only  be  conducted  of  principal  employees.  Purging  of  these  files  is  handled  by  Internal  Affairs  in 
accordance with current records retention laws. The Response to Resistance package shall be filed in the Internal 
Affairs  Section.  Upon  request,  Internal  Affairs  shall  image  and  forward  an  electronic  copy  of  the  Response  to 
Resistance package to the Criminal Intake Section, who will forward same to the Assistant State Attorney assigned to 
the criminal case.  
 
At the conclusion of each calendar year, the In-Service Training Unit supervisor will prepare an annual analysis of all 
information collected from Response to Resistance Forms and forward it to the Chief of Police for review. (4.12) 
 
 
1128.12 P&P  3/14/14 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 14 

 

APPENDIX A 
 
 
RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE CONTINUUM GUIDELINE 
(TRAINING AND TECHNIQUE GUIDELINE ONLY; SHALL NOT LIMIT THE EMPLOYEE’S RESPONSE OR PERMIT  
GREATER RESPONSE THAN OBJECTIVELY REASONABLE UNDER THE TOTALITY OF CIRCUMSTANCES.) 
 

EMPLOYEE/SUBJECT FACTORS TO BE 
CONSIDERED 

 
(cid:190)  Severity of Crime 
(cid:190)  Threat to the employee or any individual 
(cid:190)  How subject is resisting arrest 
(cid:190)  How subject was attempting to evade arrest by flight 

 

(cid:190)  Age 
(cid:190)  Sex 
(cid:190)  Size 
(cid:190)  Skill Level 
(cid:190)  Multiple subjects or members 
 

ADDITIONAL FACTORS/SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES 

(cid:190)  Known or perceived physical abilities 
(cid:190)  Known violent or mental history 
(cid:190)  Known or perceived mental incapacity 
(cid:190)  Close proximity/availability to firearms or weapons 
(cid:190)  Special knowledge 
(cid:190) 
Injury or exhaustion (employee or subject) 
(cid:190)  Known or perceived disability or special needs 
(cid:190) 
Imminent danger to employee or any individual 
(cid:190)  Characteristics of being armed 
(cid:190)  Subject’s level of agitation 
(cid:190)  Alcohol/drug influence 
(cid:190)  Subject handcuffed 
(cid:190) Environmental factors 

SUBJECT’S RESISTANCE 

 
PASSIVE RESISTANCE 
The subject fails to obey verbal direction 
preventing the employee from taking lawful 
action 

EMPLOYEE’S RESPONSE 
In every response, the employee should call 
for additional members 
 
SOFT CONTROL 

The employee applies techniques that have a 
minimal potential for injury to the subject, if the 
subject resists the technique.   

 
ACTIVE RESISTANCE 

 
HARD CONTROL 

The subject’s actions are intended to 
facilitate an escape or prevent an arrest.  
The action is not likely to cause injury. 

The employee applies techniques that could 
result in greater injury to the subject, if the 
subject resists their application by the employee.   

 
AGGRESSIVE RESISTANCE 
The subject has battered, or is about to 
batter a person/employee and the subject’s 
action is likely to cause injury. 

DEADLY FORCE 
RESISTANCE 

The subject’s actions are likely to cause 
imminent danger of death or great bodily 
harm to the employee or another person 

INTENSIFIED TECHNIQUES 
Those techniques necessary to overcome the 
actions of the subject, short of deadly force.  If 
the subject resists or continues to resist these 
techniques there is a strong probability of injury 
being incurred by the subject.   

 
DEADLY FORCE 
Employee’s actions may result in death or great 
bodily harm to the subject.   

 

TECHNIQUES 

•  Pressure Points 
•  Wrist Locks 
•  Arm Bars 
•  Compression Techniques 
•  Chemical Agents 
Diversionary Device 
•
• 
Forearm and knee strikes 
•  Open and closed hand strikes 
•  Baton strikes 
•  Kicks 
• 
• 
• 
•  Electronic Control Devices (TASER)  
•  K-9 Apprehension 
*See Appendix B for Hard Control 
Techniques target areas. 
 
• 

Takedowns 
Impact Weapons 
Tire Deflation Devices 

Techniques necessary to overcome 
actions of a subject short of deadly 
force. 

 
*  Intensified techniques may target shaded 
areas indicated in Appendix B. 

• 

The application of deadly force is not 
limited to the use of a firearm and may 
include application of other techniques 
and/or weapons 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 15 

 

APPENDIX B 
 
ANATOMICAL ILLUSTRATION 
(FOR USE OF HARD CONTROL TECHNIQUES, INTENSIFIED TECHNIQUES, AND DEADLY FORCE) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IMPACT WEAPONS: Avoid indicated shaded areas unless intensified techniques or deadly force is warranted. 
Targeting the head or neck with the baton or SAGE SL6 projectiles is acceptable in deadly force situations 
only. 
 
STRIKES (forearm, knee, hands/fist, or kicks) shall not be targeted above the shoulders, to the spine, groin or 
solar plexus unless intensified techniques or deadly force is warranted. 
 
TASERS:    A  person’s  head,  neck,  chest  (above  nipples),  or  groin  areas  shall  not  be  targeted  with  probes 
unless intensified techniques or deadly force is warranted.  
Under hard control, TASER Drive Stun techniques are approved in all areas except the head, neck, and groin. 

 

 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 16 

ATTACHMENT A 
 

 
 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 17 

 

ATTACHMENT A (continued) 
 

OPD P&P 1128.13 A Rev. 3/14/14 

 
 
 

 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 18 

 

ATTACHMENT B 
 

 

OPD P&P 1128.13 B  Rev. 3/14/14 

 
 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 19 

 

ATTACHMENT C  
 

 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 20 

 

ATTACHMENT C (Continued) 
 

 
 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 21 

 

ATTACHMENT C (Continued) 
 

 
 

 

Response to Resistance and Apprehension Techniques, 1128.13 
Page 22 

ATTACHMENT C (Continued) 
 

OPD P&P 1128.13 C  Rev. 3/14/14 

 

 

 
 

