ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  
I. 

PURPOSE 

This directive outlines the use of force for all Department employees. 

II. 

POLICY 

The  value  of  human  life  is  immeasurable  in  our  society.    Police  Officers  are  delegated  the 
responsibility  to  protect  human  life  and  property  and  to  apprehend  criminal  offenders.  The 
apprehension of criminal offenders and the protection of property at all times must be secondary to 
the protection of human life, including the officer’s own life. 

It is the policy of the Department that a police officer acting in his official capacity, may discharge a 
firearm or use other deadly force toward a person only when  the officer is legally justified to do so 
and the use of force complies with Department policy. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  Department  that  Public  Safety  Officers  and  crime  scene  personnel  are 
authorized  and  trained  to  carry  OC  Spray  for  defensive  purposes  only.    They  should  avoid 
confrontation and should retreat or leave the area if situations escalate. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  Department  that  an  employee  shall  not  use  greater  force  than  is  reasonably 
necessary to complete their lawful duties. 

While  the  use  of  force  is  occasionally  unavoidable,  employees  will  not  inflict  unnecessary  pain  or 
suffering on any person; nor will an employee engage in agitating, degrading, or inhuman treatment.  
Any employee that witnesses such behavior is obligated to report the behavior to a supervisor.  

Newly  hired  Police  Officers,  Detention  Officers  and  Public  Safety  Officers  will  be  instructed  in  and 
issued a copy of this Directive prior to carrying any weapons. 

The  Confrontational  Continuum  in  this  Directive  shall  be  used  as  a  guide  in  making  use  of  force 
decisions.  

A.  Baton Round – an extended range impact weapon, performing the same function as a hand held 

baton, except at extended ranges. 

B.  Less Lethal Force – A force applied in a situation where a person has the immediate ability and 
means  to  escalate  a  confrontation  which  will  place  an  officer,  a  citizen,  or  the  subject  at  risk  of 
serious bodily injury or death.  Less lethal force is applied with the intention to reduce or eliminate 
a threat but there is a statistical possibility that serious bodily injury or death may occur when this 
type of force is applied. 

C.  Police Officer – a sworn employee, licensed as a peace officer by the Texas Commission on Law 

Enforcement. 

the Department. 

D.  Detention Officer – an employee assigned to the Plano Municipal Jail having completed required 

training by the Department for said position. 

E.  Public Safety Officer – a uniformed non-sworn employee that may be assigned to any Division in 

F.  Crime  Scene  Personnel  –  an  employee  assigned  to  the  Department  Crime  Scene  Unit  as  a 

Criminalist or Criminalist Supervisor. 

G.  Employee – for the purpose of this policy the term “employee” means a Police Officer, Detention 

Officer, Crime Scene Personnel and / or a Public Safety Officer. 

III. 

DEFINITIONS 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 1 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

circumstances as the actor. 

H.  Reasonable Belief – a belief that would be held by an ordinary and prudent person in the same 

I.  Serious Bodily Injury – bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, 
serious  permanent  disfigurement,  or  protracted  loss  or  impairment  of  the  function  of  any  bodily 
member or organ. 

J.  SL-6 SAGE Launcher – a six shot, semi-automatic launcher that launches a 37mm baton round. 

K.  TASER  –  an  Electronic  Controlled  Weapon  that  discharges,  via  compressed  air,  two  contact 
probes  connected  by  high  voltage  insulated  wires  that  transmits  a  26-Watt  electrical  signal  to 
physically incapacitate a resisting person. 

L.  Restraining  Chair  –  a  mobile  unit  designed  to  immobilize  a  violent  prisoner  safely  in  an  upright 
position  to  prevent  the  prisoner  from  injuring  themselves  or  others.    The  restraining  chair  is 
equipped with the following safety features: back support padding, wrists restraints, leg restraints, 
buckle release cover and a transportation carriage.  The restraining chair is kept and used only in 
the jail. 

M.  Immediate Deadly Threat – A perceived imminent threat in which an officer reasonably believes 
that he may use deadly force or the threat of deadly force, in order to prevent serious bodily injury 
or death to himself or another, and in accordance with Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code.  

N.  Safety Circle – A geographical location that represents the safest direction to point a firearm in a 
real world or street environment. The “safety circle” is when the muzzle is pointed at the ground 
and inside a circular area about a yard in diameter inside of which the officer is standing or sitting. 
The muzzle is not pointed at any person. 

IV. 

PROCEDURES 

A.  The Confrontational Continuum 

Diverse factors influence an employee's decision on the appropriate force necessary to control a 
situation.  Because the use of force does not occur in a vacuum, it is impossible to list all factors 
that  shape  an  employee's  decision.    Age,  physical  size,  relative  strength,  skill  level  and 
injury/exhaustion of the employee and the offender, as well as the number of employees versus 
the  number  of  offenders  are  reasonable  factors  for  an  employee  to  consider  when  determining 
the appropriate use of force for a given situation.  Each situation is different and may require an 
employee to choose an appropriate level of force on the Confrontational Continuum, rather than 
progressing through each step in the Continuum.  However, in every instance employees shall 
use  only  that  force  which  is  reasonably  necessary  to  accomplish  their  lawful  duties.  The 
levels  of  force  are  described  in  the  Confrontational  Continuum  for  the  purposes  of  providing 
employees  guidance  in  complying  with  the  department's  Use  of  Force  Policy  and  include  the 
following: 

1.  Dialogue:  The most basic defensive measure available to an employee. Dialogue is used to 
persuade  a  person  to  cooperate.    "Talking"  a  person  into  compliance  avoids  the  inherent 
dangers  of  a  physical  confrontation  in  which  the  employee  or  person  may  be  injured.  
Whenever possible dialogue should continue to be used at every level of the continuum. 

2.  Escort  Compliance:    This  is  a  low-level,  non-threatening  and  non-violent  compliance 
procedure.  The purpose of an escort technique is to remove  a person from an area where 
the  person  and/  or  the  employee  may  be  in  jeopardy.    This  includes  handcuffing  of  a 
compliant subject. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 2 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

3.  Pain Compliance:  When an escort technique fails or would be unsafe, the next force option 
is  a  pain  compliance  technique.    Pain  compliance  techniques  include  the  manipulation  of 
joints or pressure points to cause pain or the use of OC spray. Compliance results from an 
effort on the part of the person to relieve the discomfort. 

4.  Mechanical Compliance:  When pain compliance is ineffective, the next option is mechanical 
control.    Mechanical  control  includes  the  use  of  a  punch,  kick,  throw,  or  stun.  Mechanical 
control has a higher probability of gaining compliance, but there is also a higher potential of 
injury to the suspect.  As a result, mechanical control is used only in those circumstances in 
which  the  preceding  levels  of  force  are  inappropriate  due  to  the  subject's  behavior  or  have 
shown to be an ineffective means of control. 

a.  Exception: A knee strike to the common peroneal nerve motor point to effect a takedown 
may  be  used  as  an  authorized  distraction  technique.  This  technique  is  used  when 
attempting  to  escort  an  individual  and  they  attempt  to  resist.  A  knee  strike  used  in  this 
manner  only  as  a  distraction  technique  is  considered  a  use  of  force  at  the  Pain 
Compliance level.  

5. 

Impact Weapon:  When mechanical compliance fails, is unsafe, or is an inappropriate use of 
force  response,  the  use  of  an  impact  weapon  is  permitted.    Impact  weapons  are  an 
intermediate  level  of  force  and  bridge  the  gap  between  the  use  of  mechanical  compliance 
and the use of lethal force to control an assailant. 

6.  Less Lethal Options:   

a.  Taser – A Taser is a less lethal force option which delivers electrical energy and can be 
deployed  against  subjects  who  have  the  immediate  ability  and  means  to  escalate  a 
confrontation which will place an officer, a citizen, or the subject at risk of serious bodily 
injury or death.  The Taser is used to incapacitate a subject allowing officers to take him 
or her into custody minimizing the risk of injury to all parties involved.  This level of force 
applies regardless of whether the Taser is fired or used in the drive stun mode.   

b.  Sage – Sage is a less lethal force option which can be used with greater accuracy and at 
a  greater  distance  to  incapacitate  individuals,  control  crowds  and  in  mobile  field  force 
situations  with  less  risk  to  the  Police  Officer’s  personal  safety.    The  use  of  less  lethal 
ordnance  and  ammunition  is  decisive  action  that  can  assist  in  protecting  life,  restoring 
order,  enabling  an  arrest  and  reducing  the  risk  of  more  serious  injury.    Less  lethal 
ammunition may be used against subjects who have the immediate ability and means to 
escalate  a  confrontation  which  will  place  an  officer,  a  citizen,  or  the  subject  at  risk  of 
serious bodily injury or death. 

7.  Lethal Force:  Force that, by design or under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily 
capable  of  causing  serious  bodily  injury  or  death.    The  phrase  “deadly  force”  has  the  same 
meaning as lethal force. 

B.  Medical Assistance 

Anytime  force  is  used  and  the  person  is  injured,  complains  of  injury,  or  an  injury  is  suspected, 
appropriate  medical  assistance  shall  be  provided  to  the  injured  person.    The  employee  should 
continue  to  render  first  aid  to  the  best  of  his/her  ability  and  ensure  that  Emergency  Medical 
Services (EMS) personnel are called to the incident scene or to the jail. 

C.  Prisoners at Higher Risk  

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

1.  Combative  persons  who  have  died  in  police  custody  exhibit  “common  characteristics”  
including:    intoxication  (alcohol  and  drugs),  violent  or  bizarre  behavior,  upper  body  obesity, 

Page 3 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

profuse  sweating,  disrobing  and  other  indicators  of  elevated  body  temperatures,  and/or  
restraint in a prone position. 

2.  Upon recognition of a person exhibiting these traits, the Police Officer shall ensure that EMS 
personnel are called to the scene.  While awaiting arrival of EMS personnel the Police Officer 
shall closely monitor the person and not leave the person unattended. 

3.  Persons restrained with their hands behind their back may be at a higher risk of death when 
kept  in  a  prone  position;  therefore,  it  is  the  policy  of  the  Department  to  avoid  keeping  a 
person in a prone position.  Police Officers shall sit the person in an upright position as soon 
as  it  is  safe  to  do  so.    If  it  is  necessary  to  leave  a  restrained  person  on  the  ground, 
immediately position the person so he/she lay on their left side. 

4.  The arresting officer will notify detention personnel of any abnormal behavior and/or traits that 

the person is/was exhibiting when the person is released to detention personnel.  

5.  After a high-risk prisoner is released to the Jail, the Detention personnel shall closely monitor 
the person.  Detention personnel shall call for EMS to respond to the jail should the person’s 
behavior re-manifest. 

D.  Jail Restraint Options 

1.  Occasionally a prisoner must be prevented from harming him/her self or others.  This can be 
accomplished  by  limiting  the  prisoner  living  space  or  by  restricting  his/her  capacity  for 
physical  movement.    The  process  of  booking  a  person  into  the  jail  will  be  delayed  until  the 
person is cooperative. 

2.  Limited Living Space 

For certain kinds of harmful or disruptive behavior, confining the prisoner to a single cell for a 
short  period  may  be  all  that  is  necessary.    A  prisoner  who  has  an  emotional  outburst  and 
physically threatens another prisoner or a Detention Officer may often be effectively handled 
simply by securing the prisoner in a single cell until he/she calms down. 

3.  Psychological Holding Area 

This holding area is fully padded with a toilet and in full view of the Central Control Station for 
monitoring.    A  combative  prisoner,  who  is  out  of  control,  should  be  placed  in  this  area  until 
he/she  becomes  cooperative  and  can  be  removed  without  causing  injury  to  themselves  or 
others. 

4.  Restraining Chair 

The restraining chair will be used only as a means of restraint when handling prisoners who 
display violent behavior toward themselves or other and Psychological holding has not been 
effective.    Under  no  circumstances  will  the  chair  be  used  as  a  means  of  punishment.    The 
prisoner is to remain confined in the restraint chair only until he/she has calmed, is willing to 
cooperate and poses no threat to self or others. 

a.  The  booking  floor  will  be  cleared  of  all  activity  when  the  restraint  chair  is  in  use.    The 
chair  will  be  placed  in  an  area  where  the  prisoner  can  be  closely  monitored  by  jail 
personnel and is not in plain view of other prisoners. 

b.  When  the  prisoner  can  be  released  from  the  chair,  the  jailer  will  examine  him/her  for 
injuries  sustained  while  in  custody.    The  jailer  will  be  responsible  for  acquiring  any 
needed medical attention including transportation to a medical facility.  If the prisoner can 
be  assigned  a  cell,  the  jailer  should  follow  through  with  standard  jail  procedures  and 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 4 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

complete the book-in process. 

E.  Oleoresin Capsicum (OC) 

1.  Oleoresin  Capsicum  (OC)  spray  is  an  inflammatory  agent  derived  from  the  fruit  of  plants  in 
the  Capsicum  genus.    It  is  packaged  in  a  pressurized  aerosol  spray.    Research  shows  that 
when  OC  spray  is  used  to  subdue  a  potentially  violent  or  violent  person,  the  likelihood  of 
continued resistance by the person is lessened, thus lessening the chance that the employee 
or the person will be injured. 

2.  Employees whose duties require them to carry OC spray are authorized to use OC spray only 
after  successful  completion  of  a  Department  approved  OC  spray  training  course.    During 
training,  the  individual  employee  may  choose  to  be  exposed  to  OC  spray  in  a  controlled 
setting.  An employee’s exposure to OC spray is not a requirement to complete the training 
course. 

3.  The  use  of  OC  spray  is  considered  use  of  force  at  the  Pain  Compliance  level  on  the 
Confrontational Continuum.  A Police Officer or Detention Officer who is justified in using OC 
spray against a person is not prevented from using greater force against that person if he/she 
reasonably believes greater force is necessary and justified by Department policy to achieve 
his/her lawful duty.  

a.  OC  spray  should  not  be  used  as  “punishment”  or  as  a  coercive  tool  after  a  person  is 

under control. 

b.  Under most circumstances, OC spray shall not be used on persons who are handcuffed 

unless the person is resisting to the point that lesser force options have failed. 

c.  OC spray shall not be used in riots, demonstrations or other civil disorders, except under 

the direction of a Lieutenant or a higher-ranking Commander. 

d.  Employees shall not indiscriminately use OC spray.  Such use is unnecessary force. 

e.  OC spray shall not be used in the mere anticipation of violence or resistance unless the 
employee has articulable justification (i.e., statements by the person that he/she intends 
to  resist  arrest  or  assault  the  employee,  the  person  exhibits  agitated  or  aggressive 
behavior or the person’s size, strength, and/or level of intoxication).  Time permitting, the 
person should be verbally advised that he/she will be sprayed with OC if he/she resists or 
continues combative actions. 

f. 

Ideally,  OC  spray  should  be  used  at  a  distance  of  four  to  six  feet  from  the  intended 
person and directed at the face.  A one to two second burst of OC spray should control 
most persons.  Employees shall use only the amount of OC spray reasonably necessary 
to stop a subject’s physical aggression or resistance. 

g.  Employees  using  OC  spray  must  use  caution  to  avoid  spraying  other  employees  who 
may be near the person.  Employees should warn others they are about to use OC spray 
by shouting “Pepper” in a loud voice.  After spraying a person, allow 5-10 seconds for the 
majority of the OC spray to disperse before moving in to handcuff the person. 

h.  Employees  shall  be  cognizant  of  the  adverse  reactions  that  a  person  may  have  when 
exposed  to  OC.    Persons  exposed  to  OC  should  be  moved  to  an  area  that  is  well 
ventilated  with  fresh  air,  preferably  outside.    The  person  should  be  verbally  reassured 
that  the  effects  of  OC  are  temporary.    The  employee  should  encourage  the  person  to 
relax and take deep breaths. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 5 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

i.  Arrested  persons  who  are  exposed  to  OC  shall  be  transported  to  the  jail  as  soon  as 
possible.  Persons exposed to OC should recover in 15-30 minutes simply by flushing the 
exposed areas of the body with cool water.  Upon arrival at the jail, the person may be 
allowed  to  rinse  affected  areas  of  the  body  in  the  jail  shower  if,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
arresting officer, it is safe to allow the person to do so.  No ointment or lotions of any type 
should  be  applied  to  the  bodily  areas  exposed  to  OC  since  this  will  only  trap  the  OC.  
EMS personnel shall be called for persons that continue to exhibit the effects of OC for 
more than 45 minutes after exposure.  

j.  Police  Officers  who  have  custody  of  an  arrested  person  that  was  exposed  to  OC  shall 
clearly  advise  detention  personnel,  medical  personnel  and  other  employees  that  the 
person was exposed to OC PRIOR to these personnel coming into physical contact with 
the arrested person. 

4.  Officers shall be cognizant that the use of OC Spray on certain individuals may result in an 
unusual  or  severe  reaction  to  the  spray.  OC  Spray  should  generally  not  be  used  on  the 
following persons: 

a.  Children under the age of 12 years due to lack of respiratory development. 

b.  Elderly persons due to health considerations. 

c.  Women who are pregnant. 

d.  Persons holding an infant or small child. 

e.  Asthmatic  persons.   While  the  use  of  OC  Spray  on  Asthmatic  persons  is  not  known  to 
cause  any  unusual  effects,  it  should  be  considered  by  the  officer  that  use  of  OC  Spray 
may trigger and asthma attack due to excitement or fear. 

5.  Police Officers of the rank of Sergeant and below and Public Safety Officers shall carry OC 
spray. Police Officers in the rank of Lieutenant and above and Crime Scene Personnel have 
the option to carry OC spray.  Detention Officers will have OC spray available for use in the 
Jail. 

a.  Uniformed Police Officers, Crime Scene Personnel and Public Safety Officers shall carry 
the OC spray canister on the duty belt in the issued carrier.  Canisters of OC spray shall 
not  be  left  in  patrol  vehicles  nor  be  exposed  to  extremes  of  temperatures  that  could 
cause the pressurized canisters to burst. 

b.  Canisters of OC spray shall be replaced whenever the canister will not effectively deliver 
the  product,  upon  expiration  of  the  manufacturers  recommended  shelf  life  or  upon  a 
malfunction of the canister. 

c.  Employees shall not carry OC spray into jail.  The employee will place the canister in a 

gun locker prior to entering the jail area.  

F.  Chemical Munitions 

1.  The  Tactical  Team  has  access  to  a  variety  of  hand  tossed  and  37mm  launched  chemical 
rounds consisting of OC, CS gas and combination OC/CS for use during civil disturbance and 
Emergency Services Unit (ESU) callouts.  An incident commander in the rank of Captain or 
higher  shall  make  the  decision  to  deploy  these  weapons  during  civil  disturbances.    If  a 
Captain  is  not  available,  an  incident  commander  in  the  rank  of  Lieutenant  is  authorized  to 
make the decision to deploy chemical munitions during civil disturbances and ESU callouts. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 6 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

2.  The Tactical Team will designate team personnel to receive external training on the specific 
munitions  in  the  department’s  inventory.    A  sufficient  number  of  team  members  shall  be 
trained  on  each  team  so  that  personnel  familiar  with  the  use,  capabilities,  and  hazards  of 
these munitions are available during a critical incident. 

G.  Use of Police Impact Weapons 

1.  Uniformed  Police  Officers  of  the  rank  of  Sergeant  and  below  shall  carry  the  department 
approved baton or department approved alternate baton, after completion of the department 
sanctioned course of training. 

2.  The baton shall be used only when a lesser level of force on the Confrontational Continuum 
has  proved  ineffective  in  overcoming  resistance  by  a  person,  or  the  lesser  level  of  force 
would be unsafe or inappropriate; or in the protection from an assault by any person. 

3.  Police Officers shall not use the baton to strike a person’s head, neck/throat, back/spinal area 

or groin unless the use of lethal force is justified by department policy. 

4.  Employees are prohibited from carrying the following impact weapons: 

a.  Slapper 

b.  Saps 

c.  Weighted Gloves 

d.  Knuckles 

e.  Other similar type weapons 

5.  The department issued or approved flashlight may be used as an impact weapon when  the 
standard  baton  is  not  readily  available.    When  a  Police  Officer  uses  the  flashlight  as  an 
impact  weapon,  the  officer  shall  adhere  to  the  Department’s  policy  on  use  of  force.    Police 
Officers shall be trained in the appropriate use of the flashlight as an impact weapon. 

H.  TASER 

1.  Only  Police  Officers  who  have  successfully  completed  a  department  approved  TASER 
training course are authorized to carry and use the TASER.  Police Officers shall carry and 
use only department issued TASERS. 

a.  Plano  police  TASER  instructors  will  not  provide  a  TASER  exposure  to  any  person  for 

training or demonstration purposes.  

b.  Plano  police  employees  are  not  authorized  to  receive  a  voluntary  TASER  exposure  for 
training  or  demonstration  purposes.  TASER  exposure  includes  the  use  of  probes, 
alligator clips, affixing probes to the skin, and drive stuns. 

2.  The TASER is an effective defensive weapon, which fills the void allowing standoff incidents 
to be handled in a safer method, both for Police Officers and for the person.  The TASER can 
be  used  to  control  dangerous  or  violent  persons  when  deadly  force  does  not  appear  to  be 
immediately justified. 

3.  When deploying the Taser, do not aim at the chest.  The aiming point on the front of the body 
is below the chest, center mass between the sternum and waistline. It is understood that in 
dynamic situations, unintentional impacts to the chest could occur but efforts must be made 
to avoid chest impacts.   

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 7 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

purposes. 

4.  Use  of  a  cover  officer  during  Taser  deployment  should  be  considered  for  officer  safety 

5.  The TASER may be used as a touch-stun device.  When used in this mode, the use of the 
TASER  is  subject  to  the  same  guidelines  and  restrictions  when  used  during  cartridge 
deployment. The frontal area is an approved impact area. The chest area should be avoided.  
It is understood that in dynamic situations, unintentional impacts to the chest could occur but 
efforts must be made to avoid chest impacts.  

6.  A TASER application shall not exceed five (5) seconds. 

7.  Officers  utilizing  the  TASER  shall  activate  it  for  one  standard  cycle  (5  seconds)  and 
immediately  attempt  to  control  and  restrain  the  subject  to  minimize  the  necessity  of  an 
additional  cycle.   Officers  may  activate  an  additional  cycle  (up  to  a  maximum  of  two)  only  if 
the person continues to be an immediate threat to himself or others and a lesser force option 
would be ineffective or unsafe. The TASER shall not be activated more than two times on any 
single subject unless the person continues to be an immediate threat to himself or others and 
the person has the means to commit serious bodily injury or death to himself or others. 

a.  After  deploying  the  TASER  on  an  individual,  assess  their  condition  and  re-evaluate  the 

threat before actuating the TASER again. 

b. 

It is imperative that each activation of the TASER (i.e. each trigger pull) must be justified 
independently under current Plano PD Use of Force policy and the actions of the violator 
must  rise  to  the  level  of  force  justifying  the  use  of  the  TASER  upon  each  individual 
activation. 

8.  Certain  individuals  may  be  more  susceptible  to  serious  injury  from  a  TASER  application; 
therefore, the TASER shall not be used against the following persons unless the person is an 
immediate threat to themselves or others and the person has the means to commit serious 
bodily injury or death to themselves or others. 

a.  Females known or suspected of being pregnant. 

b.  Persons holding or carrying an infant. 

c.  Children known, or who appear to be younger than twelve (12) years of age. 

d.  Persons known, or who appear to be older than 70 years of age. 

e.  Persons known or suspected of wearing a pacemaker. 

f.  Persons in handcuffs. 

9.  The  TASER  shall  not  be  used  on  a  person  where  a  fall  may  cause  serious  bodily  injury  or 
death,  unless  the  person  is  an  immediate  threat  to  others  and  the  person  has  a  means  to 
commit serious bodily injury or death to others. 

10.  A person may not be able to respond to commands during or immediately following a TASER 
shock.    Subjects  should  be  secured  as  soon  as  practical  while  disabled  by  the  TASER 
charge. 

11.  The  TASER  shall  not  be  used  in  the  presence  of  flammable  liquids,  vapors  or  sensitive 

explosives. 

12.  In every instance where the TASER is used, including the touch-stun mode, EMS personnel 

shall transport the person to a hospital for medical evaluation and removal of probes.  

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 8 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

13.  Photographs  shall  be  taken  of  persons  who  are  exposed  to  a  TASER  charge  as  soon  as 
possible.    The  photographs  should  show  the  person’s  injuries,  or  the  lack  thereof,  and  the 
point of contact of the TASER probes.  If possible, photographs should be taken before the 
removal of the probes.  The photographs shall be placed into evidence. 

14.  The expended TASER cartridge and probes shall be collected and placed in evidence. 

15.  Professional  Standards  Unit  personnel  shall  download  the  TASER  data  port  after  each  use 
and  forward  the  TASER  usage  report  with  the  Use  of  Force  Report  during  the  review 
process. 

16.  Police  Officers  assigned  a  TASER  are  responsible  for  inspection  of  the  TASER  at  the 
beginning  of  their  shift.    Police  Officers  are  required  to  wear  the  TASER  in  a  department 
issued or approved holster on the opposite side of the body that the duty firearm is worn. 

17.  Under  no  circumstances  shall  any  employee  tamper  with  or  alter  in  any  manner  any 
department  issued  TASERs  or  TASER  cartridges.    Police  Officers  shall  use  TASER 
International brand cartridges only with department issued TASERs. 

I.  SAGE Less Lethal Launcher System 

1.  The  SAGE  Less  Lethal  Launcher  System  provides  Police  Officers  an  option  of  less  lethal 
force that can be used with greater accuracy and at a greater distance.  In every instance, the 
use  of  the  SAGE  Less  Lethal  System  shall  be  reasonably  necessary  and  comply  with 
Departmental policy. 

2.  Only personnel who have successfully completed a departmentally approved training course 
in  the  proper  use  and  deployment  of  the  SAGE  Less  Lethal  Munitions  System  shall  be 
authorized  to  use  the  SAGE  Launcher  System  during  actual  police  operations.    Police 
Officers are required to qualify with the SAGE Launcher on an annual basis.   

3.  No  member  of  the  Department  shall  attempt  to  use  the  SAGE  Launcher  System  without 

having a cover officer with a lethal option available. 

4.  When  any  person  is  struck  with  a  baton  round  that  has  been  launched  from  the  SAGE 

Launcher, EMS Personnel will be called to the scene to evaluate injuries. 

5.  All  SAGE  launchers  assigned  to  the  Patrol  Services  Division  shall  be  stored  loaded  in  the 
hard storage case, designed for this purpose, in the trunk of the patrol supervisors' vehicles.  
Patrol supervisors or deployment officers shall be responsible for checking the weapon at the 
beginning of each shift to ensure that it is loaded. 

6.  Under no circumstances shall any person tamper with or alter in any manner any less lethal 
impact  projectiles.    Only  factory-loaded  rounds  will  be  used  during  actual  police  operations.  
Reloads will only be used for training and qualification purposes. 

Employees of the Department are prohibited from using neck restraints unless the use of 
lethal force is justified by Department policy. 

J.  Use of Neck Restraints 

K.  Weapons Positions 

1.  Philosophy:   

a.  The two pillars of firearms safety are trigger control and muzzle control. The Plano Police 
Department stresses the importance of trigger and muzzle control through identifying and 
defining the four (4) weapon positions below, consistency in training, and the reporting of 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 9 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

Use  of  Force  incidents.  These  pillars  are  consistent  with  the  four  (4)  firing  range  safety 
rules  (SOP  401.001).  The  muzzle  of  an  officer’s  weapon  should  never  be  intentionally 
pointed  at  any  person  unless  the  officer  reasonably  perceives  the  person  to  be  an 
immediate deadly threat.  An officer’s finger should never be in the trigger guard unless 
the officer is intending to immediately fire his weapon.  

2.  PRPTC Firing Range Safety Rules (See also SOP 401.001) 

a.  Treat all weapons as if they are loaded. 

b.  Always point the weapon in a safe direction (muzzle down range). 

c.  Keep your finger outside the trigger guard until sights are on target and you are prepared 

to fire. 

3.   Positions: 

d.  Be sure of your target and the environment behind and around it. 

a.  Holstered/Secured  –  Handgun  is  secured  within  the  officer’s  holster  and  under  the 
officer’s immediate control. Rifle/Shotgun is locked into the patrol vehicle’s rifle rack or it 
is placed inside of a case and secured with a cable.  

b.  Un-holstered/Safety  Circle  –  Handgun  is  held  by  the  officer  in  a  fashion  described  as 
the “safety circle.” The safety is on and the trigger finger is outside of the trigger guard. 
The  officer  should  maintain  at  least  one  hand  on  the  weapon  at  all  times.  This  position 
includes the slinging and “hanging” of long guns (shotguns and rifles) when the officer is 
at rest.  

c.  Ready – Handgun is held so that the muzzle is pointed outside of the “safety circle,” but 
the  muzzle  is  not  intentionally  pointed  at  any  person.  The  safety  is  on  and  the  trigger 
finger is outside of the trigger guard. There is no immediate deadly threat but an officer 
reasonably  believes  they  may  encounter  an  immediate  deadly  threat.  Ready  position  is 
also  used  after  an  immediate  deadly  threat  is  over  (scanning)  or  when  the  officer  is 
relatively  sure  the  immediate  deadly  threat  has  passed.  This  position  reduces  reaction 
time and the officer is prepared to instantly respond to an immediate deadly threat. 

d.  On-Threat  –  Weapon  is  held  so  that  the  muzzle  is  purposely  pointed  at  a  person 
reasonably perceived to be an immediate deadly threat. The safety remains on while the 
trigger finger is outside the trigger guard unless the officer is intending to immediately fire 
his weapon. For shotguns, the safety can be off. 

L.  Use of Lethal Force 

1.  Police  Officers  are  equipped  with  firearms  to  defend  themselves  and  others  against  deadly 
force  and  when  it  is  reasonably  necessary  to  do  so,  to  affect  the  arrest  of  an  escaping  or 
fleeing  felon,  ensuring  such  Use  of  Force  is  in  compliance  with  Departmental  Directives.  
When a Police Officer discharges a firearm, it must be with the realization that the death of a 
person may occur, not necessarily with the intent that such will be the result. 

2.  Justification for the use of any form of deadly force is limited to what reasonably appears to 
be the facts known or perceived by a Police Officer at the time the officer decides to use such 
force.  Facts unknown to a Police Officer, no matter how compelling, cannot be considered in 
later determining whether the shooting was justified. 

3.  A Police Officer is not justified in the use of deadly force to protect him/her self or others from 

assaults that are not likely to result in death or serious bodily injury. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 10 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

4. 

In the event any use of force by a Police Officer results in the death of or serious bodily injury 
to  an  individual,  that  officer  will  be  reassigned  from  line  duty  assignment  pending  the 
completion  of  an  administrative  review  of  the  incident.    However,  if  there  is  sufficient 
information to show that the use of force was justified and complied with Department policy, 
the  Chief  of  Police  may  make  the  decision  to  return  the  officer  to  full  duty  before  the 
completion of the administrative review.  

5.  Police Officers are permitted to discharge a firearm only under the following circumstances: 

a.  At an approved target at an approved shooting range. 

b.  For target practice or recreational shooting in areas where shooting a firearm is safe and 

it is not in violation of any statute or ordinance. 

c.  At  any  animal  that  is  obviously  mad  or  vicious  and  otherwise  cannot  be  stopped  from 

killing or seriously injuring a person. 

d.  To euthanize a critically injured animal.  Prior to euthanizing the animal the Police Officer 
shall make every reasonable attempt to locate and receive permission from the animal's 
owner,  seek  and  receive  supervisory  approval  and  ensure  that  the  discharge  of  the 
firearm will not endanger any person or other property. 

e. 

In self-defense or in the defense of another person from what reasonably appears to be 
the use or imminent use of deadly force or the immediate danger of serious bodily injury. 

f.  At another person to effect an arrest or to prevent the escape from custody a person who 
the Police Officer has probable cause to believe committed a felony involving the use of a 
deadly weapon, and 

(1)  the  person  is  attempting  to  escape  by  using  a  deadly  weapon,  or  the  person 
otherwise  poses  an  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  to  another 
person; and 

(2)  the  use  of  deadly  force  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  escape  and  all  other  means  of 
apprehension have been exhausted or would obviously be unsuccessful if attempted; 
and 

(3)  a verbal warning, where practical, was given to the escapee. 

6.  Police Officers are NOT permitted to discharge a firearm in the following circumstances: 

a.  As a warning shot to induce the surrender of any person or for any other reason. 

b.  At persons who have committed only a misdemeanor or traffic violation. 

c.  Merely to prevent the destruction or theft of property. 

d.  To halt any person who simply runs away to avoid arrest. 

e.  When it appears reasonably possible that an innocent person could be shot. 

f.  On the mere suspicion that a person committed a crime, no matter how serious. 

g.  At moving vehicles.  Exception: As a last resort and only when deadly force is justified 

by Department policy. 

(1)  The mere assumption that a fleeing vehicle is a deadly weapon and may cause injury 
to an officer or citizen is NOT justification for a Police Officer to discharge a firearm 
toward the vehicle, at the driver, or the occupants. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 11 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

(2)  When  justified  by  Departmental  policy  to  shoot  at  a  moving  vehicle,  Police  Officers 

shall consider all risks before doing so. 

7.  Police Officers shall use threats of deadly force only when reasonably necessary. 

8.  Reducing the Risk of Death 

a.  Regardless  of  the  nature  of  the  crime  or  the  legal  justification  for  shooting  at  a  person, 
Police Officers are reminded that their basic responsibility is to protect the public.  Police 
Officers  are  instructed  to  be  particularly  cautious  when  shooting  under  conditions  that 
would subject innocent bystanders to danger. 

b. 

In  the  extreme  stresses  of  a  shooting  decision,  a  Police  Officer  may  not  have  the 
opportunity or ability to direct the shots to a non-fatal area.  To require the officer to do so 
could increase the risk of harm to the officer or others. 

9.  Surrender of Weapon 

10.  Use of Police Vehicles 

Police Officers are strongly discouraged from ever surrendering their weapon.  The ultimate 
decision to surrender one’s weapon must be made by each individual officer involved, based 
upon the circumstances that surround the incident. 

Police  Officers  shall  not  use  a  police  vehicle  as  a  roadblock,  to  ram  or  to  force  another 
vehicle off the roadway, except as a last resort and only when deadly force is authorized by 
Department policy.  When a Police Officer is authorized by Department policy to collide with 
or pull in front of a vehicle, the Officer shall consider all risks before doing so. 

M.  Reporting Use of Force 

1.  A  Use  of  Force  Report  shall  be  completed  for  each  use  of  force  incident.    All  appropriate 
reports will be attached.  Each involved employee will be named in the Use of Force Report.  
Each  employee  using  force  or  witnessing  the  incident  shall  complete  a  supplement  report 
documenting  his  or  her  actions  and  observations.    In  the  event  of  an  ESU  response  or 
Narcotics Operation, the ESU Tactical Report or Narcotics Debriefing Report (as applicable) 
will suffice in lieu of individual supplemental reports.  All reports shall be completed as soon 
as  possible  after  the  incident,  but  in  all  cases  prior  to  the  end  of  the  shift.    This  applies  to 
incidents  that  occur  during  an  employee’s  tour  of  duty  or  when  an  employee  is  off  duty 
utilizing  his/her  law  enforcement  authority.    The  involved  employee  shall  be  responsible  for 
notifying an on-duty supervisor immediately after using force.  The supervisor shall complete 
the Use of Force report prior to the end of his or her shift. 

2.  A Use of Force Report shall be completed in the following circumstances: 

a.  When  using  any  degree  of  force  or  physical  restraint  which,  by  the  nature  of  its  use, 

causes, or has the likelihood to cause bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death. 

b.  When  an  employee  purposely  strikes  a  person  either  with  personal  weapons  or  impact 

weapons. 

c.  When an employee uses OC Spray or a chemical agent. 

d.  When a Police Officer points or uses a TASER. 

e.  When a Police Officer points or uses the SAGE Launcher. 

f.  When  a  Police  Officer  presents  his  firearm  in  the  “ready”  or  “on-threat”  position  in  the 
presence of a suspect or the public within the scope of their law enforcement authority. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 12 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

g.  When a Police Officer presents his firearm in the “un-holstered/safety circle,” “ready,” or 
“on-threat”  position  while  not  in  uniform  or  “approved  departmental  attire”  but  in  the 
presence  of  a  suspect  or  the  public.    “Approved  department  attire”  is  defined  in  this 
section as a shirt, vest, or jacket that is designed to clearly identify the wearer as a police 
officer by the word “POLICE” being prominently visible on the front and back.        

h.  When a Police Officer discharges a firearm in his/her law enforcement authority, for other 

than training or recreational purposes. 

i.  When a Police Officer causes bodily injury to a person. 

j.  When  a  person  complains  of  bodily  injury  resulting  from  any  type  of  police  action 

involving a physical confrontation. 

k.  When  a  Police  Officer    threatens  a  person  with  deadly  force.  Merely  placing  a  hand  on 

the firearm does not require a Use of Force Report. 

l.  When a canine is used to physically subdue a person. 

m.  In the event of an ESU response. 

n.  When a prisoner is restrained in the Restraint Chair. 

o.  For any reason not listed above, that a supervisor deems necessary, a review should be 

done. 

discretion. 

Note:  The  Watch  Commander  or  supervisor  on  duty  shall  make  the  final  decision  as  to  the 

appropriateness of completion of the Use of Force report. 

3.  The  Chief  of  Police  may  require  a  review  of  an  incident  where  force  was  used  at  his/her 

4.  The  Use  of  Force  Report,  all  official  reports  and  recordings  shall  be  reviewed  by  the 
employee’s  chain-of-command  to  determine  whether  the  use  of  force  complied  with 
department policy. 

5.  Upon  review  of  a  use  of  force  incident,  the  employee’s  chain  of  command  will  report  its 

findings, relevant to the following aspects of the incident. 

a.  Whether the force used was: 

(1)  Within policy 

(2)  Out of policy 

(3)  Accidental 

b.  Any relevant tactical considerations: 

(1)  Drawing and exhibiting firearms, if applicable 

(2)  Firing of weapon or application of force 

(3)  Tactics prior to the use of force 

(4)  Tactics during and following the use of force 

(5)  Any relevant training considerations 

c.  The quality of supervision prior to, during and after the incident 

d.  Any relevant discipline considerations 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 13 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVE – 112.008 
USE OF FORCE 

REVISION DATE:  April 7, 2015 

 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  October 18, 1991 
REVIEW SCHEDULE:  Annual 
AFFECTS:  All Personnel 
  

e.  The post-incident investigative processes and quality 

6.  The  Division  Commander  will  determine  whether  the  use  of  force  occurred  in  a  manner 
consistent  with  policy  and,  where  appropriate,  disciplinary  action.    The  Chief  of  Police  will 
have final review of all Use of Force incidents involving death or serious bodily. 

7.  The Division Commander will notify the involved employee and his/her chain of command of 
the  disposition  of  the  review  and  forward  the  completed  Use  of  Force  report  including  any 
original documentation to the Professional Standards Unit. 

8.  The  Professional  Standards  Unit  shall  maintain  a  file  on  completed  Use  of  Force  reviews.  
The Professional Standards Unit Sergeant shall submit  a quarterly and cumulative statistical 
report regarding Use of Force incidents to the Office of the Chief of Police.  The annual report 
will include analysis of any problem areas identified, which indicate a need for further training 
or an adjustment of written directives or procedures. 

 
PLANO POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Page 14 

