THE RALEIGH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
1108-1 
USE OF FORCE AND WEAPONS 
PURPOSE 

To provide guidelines governing the use of force and issued weapons of the Department. 
VALUES REFLECTED 

This directive reflects our values of Service, Courage, and Integrity. By acting in concert with 
these instructions, we will demonstrate that we are accountable for our actions and that we 
have the highest possible regard for safeguarding life – the lives of those persons we come into 
contact with in stressful circumstances, of innocent people and of ourselves. 
UNITS AFFECTED 

All Divisions/Sworn Personnel 
REFERENCES/FORMS 

N.C. General Statute 15A-401(d) “Use of Force in Arrest” 
DOI 1108-3 “Prisoners and Restraints” 
DOI 1105-3 “Officer Involved Shootings and In-Custody Deaths” 

 

 

GENERAL POLICIES 

Force should be used only when all other means of resolving a situation have been exhausted 
or are clearly inapplicable. Force will be used only to the degree reasonably necessary to control 
the  situation.  The  extent  of  force  in  terms  of  degree  and  level  will  vary  according  to  the 
situation.  The  nature  of  the  offense,  the  physical  make-up  of  the  parties  involved,  actions  of 
third parties who may be present, potential for injury to officers, citizens or suspects, the risk of 
escape,  the  availability  of  alternatives  and  other  exigent  circumstances  are  factors  to  be 
considered. 

Officers are required to make split second decisions in quickly evolving circumstances. Officers 
must  continuously  evaluate  the  need  for  force  and  be  prepared  to  respond  to  changing 
circumstances  which  could  include  the  need  to  escalate  the  force  used,  de-escalate  the  force 
used or to disengage from the use of force. It must be stressed that the use of force is not left 
to the unfettered discretion of the involved officer. This is not a subjective determination. The 
use  of  force  must  be  objectively  reasonable.  The  officer  must  only  use  that  force  which  a 
reasonably prudent officer would use under the same or similar circumstances. 

Agency personnel must demonstrate proficiency in the use of agency authorized weapons prior 
to approval to carry such weapons. Only authorized weapons will be carried by personnel. 

OBJECTIVELY REASONABLE STANDARD 

This term means that, in determining the necessity for force and the appropriate level of force, 
officers  shall  evaluate  each  situation  in  light  of  the  known  circumstances,  including,  but  not 
limited  to,  the  seriousness  of  the  crime,  the  level  of  threat  or  resistance  presented  by  the 
subject, and the danger to the community. 

Nothing  in  this  policy  shall  be  construed  as  approving  the  unwarranted,  reckless  or  excessive 
use of force. 

It shall be the duty of every officer of this agency to attempt to prevent any other officer from 
using unwarranted, reckless, or excessive force. Any officer who witnesses or has knowledge of 
unwarranted,  reckless,  or  excessive  force  by  another  officer  shall  immediately  report  the 
incident to a supervisor or the Internal Affairs Unit. 

NON-DEADLY FORCE 

Justification for Using Non-Deadly Force 

Non-deadly  force  may be used by law  enforcement  officers  in the performance of duty under 
the following conditions: 

• In self-defense, or defense of another against unlawful violence, or to prevent suicide or self-

inflicted injury. 

• In overcoming resistance to a lawful arrest or search, or to prevent an escape from custody. 

DEADLY FORCE 

Deadly Force Defined 

“Deadly  force”  means  force  likely  to  cause  serious  physical  injury  or  death.  “Serious  physical 
injury”  means  bodily  injury  that  causes  serious  permanent  disfigurement,  or  which  causes 
permanent or protracted loss, or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 

The premeditated use of non-lethal items may be considered a use of deadly force if death or 
serious  physical  injury  occurs.  For  example,  the  deliberate  ramming  of  another  vehicle  by  a 
police vehicle could be considered a use of deadly force. 

Justification for Using Deadly Force 

Although N.C.G.S. 15A-401(d)(2)(c) permits the use of deadly force to prevent the escape of a 
person from custody imposed upon him as a result of a conviction for a felony; it is the policy of 
our Department that this authority is primarily intended to be exercised  by  NC  Department of 
Corrections  personnel,  and  that  Raleigh  police  officers  will  use  deadly  force  only  as  permitted 
under the following circumstances:  

•  In  defense  of  himself  or  a  third  person  from  what  he  reasonably  believes  to  be  the  use  or 

imminent use of deadly physical force. 

•  To  arrest  or  prevent  the  escape  of  a  person  whom  the  officer  reasonably  believes  is 

attempting to escape by the use of a deadly weapon. 

• To arrest or prevent escape of a person who by his conduct or any other means indicates that 
he  presents  an  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  physical  injury  to  others  unless 
apprehended without delay. 

The  use  of  deadly  force  against  an  animal  is  justified  for  self-defense  or  defense  of  a  third 
person. 

If feasible, an officer will issue a verbal warning before resorting to deadly force. If there is time 
and opportunity to provide a verbal warning, the officer should try to identify him/herself and 
inform the suspect that he/she is preparing to use deadly force. A verbal warning may not be 
possible  in  split  second  decisions  or  when  the  officer  believes  that  giving  a  verbal  warning 
would place the officer or others in jeopardy. 

Use of Force Continuum 

Officers  will  assess  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  to  determine  the  level  of  force  that  is 
reasonable in each case. Officers may consider the following use of force continuum as a guide 
when deciding when to use force and how much force to use. A continuum of force is a tool to 
assist an officer in understanding force options. 

A Linear Use of Force Continuum 

The levels of force, progressing from lower to higher, are defined as follows: 

•  Physical  Presence:  In  general,  officers  should  strive  for  numerical  superiority  and  mere 

presence to control low threat situations. 

•  Verbal  Commands:  Verbal  commands  must  be  given  in  a  concise  manner  likely  to  be 
understood  by  the  subject.  The  subject  must  be  allowed  an  opportunity  to  comply  with 
verbal commands unless violence or other circumstances are already occurring which would 
make total reliance on verbal commands inappropriate. 

•  Restraining  Techniques:  The  use  of  restraining  techniques  consists  of  come-along  holds  or 
other  grabbing  techniques  that  do  not  involve  striking  the  subject  being  controlled  and 
where the risk of injury is minimal. A chokehold could be considered a use of deadly force; 
therefore,  for  the  purposes  of  the  force  continuum,  it  is  not  considered  a  restraining 
technique. Officers should use restraining techniques that do not impair respiration.  

• Pepper Gas: The use of pepper gas consists of the use of departmentally approved, handheld 
chemical aerosols that are not likely to cause injury (Refer to Pepper Gas Guidelines below). 
Pepper gas may be used in the officer’s discretion at any point in the  continuum provided 
the suspect has begun to make aggressive actions toward or against the officer or a third 
person,  or  when  the  suspect  continues  his/her  refusal  to  comply  with  the  officer’s  lawful 
efforts to effect an arrest. 

•  Striking  Techniques:  Striking  techniques  involve  the  use  of  the  police  baton,  riot  baton,  or 
parts  of  the  body,  such  as  the  hands  or  feet.  Striking  techniques  may  be  used  both 
offensively  and  defensively.  Striking  techniques  involve  physical  force  where  some  risk  of 
injury is possible. Officers are to make efforts to  avoid striking the vital areas  of  the body 
(i.e. temples, eyes, and throat). (Refer to: Police Baton Guidelines below). 

• Less Lethal Weapons: The use of specialty impact munitions or conducted energy devices by 
authorized  and  trained  personnel  is  acceptable  when  force  is  necessary  to  incapacitate  or 
control an individual.  

Specialty  impact  munitions,  specifically  the  Exact  Impact  1006,  a  foam  projectile,  may  be 
used when it is not safe for an officer to leave cover and get close to a suspect. Examples of 
when  specialty  impact  weapons  may  be  utilized  include,  but  not  limited  to,  the  following: 
subduing  mentally  ill  persons  who  are  dangerous  to  themselves  or  others;  persons  under 
the  influence  of  drugs  or  alcohol  and  a  danger  to  themselves  or  others;  or  crowd  control 
encounters where there is a threat to officer safety.  

Officers  need  to  be  prepared  to  utilize  deadly  force  prior  to  using  a  less  lethal  weapon  to 
incapacitate  an  armed  suspect  in  the  event  the  suspect  poses  a  threat  of  death  to  the 
officer or others. 

Conducted  energy  devices  may  be  used  when  it  is  necessary  to  incapacitate  or  gain 
compliance  from  a  person  who  is  actively  resisting,  exhibiting  active  aggression,  or  to 
prevent individuals from harming themselves or others. (Refer to Conducted Energy Device 
Guidelines below). 

• Deadly force: That level of force that can cause death or serious physical injury. 

Pepper Gas Guidelines 

Pepper  gas  is  a  non-lethal  weapon  that  shoots  a  pattern  of  tear-gas-like  droplets  that  cause 
profuse  watering  of  the  eyes  and  nose.  Pepper  gas  does  not  render  a  subject  powerless. 
Rather, it creates a sense of discomfort and disorientation that may cause the person to cease 
violent acts.  

• Pepper gas is not to be used unless less forceful means of control have failed or are  clearly 

inapplicable.  

Chief of Police or designee. 

•  Pepper  gas  is  prohibited  for  crowd  control  or  crowd  dispersal  without  prior  approval  by  the 

•  The  issuance and carrying  of pepper gas is mandatory for all uniformed  officers,  detectives, 
and humane officers working in the field. It must be used according to prescribed training 
and procedures. 

•  A  half-second  burst  that  accurately  encompasses  the  face  area  produces  the  most  effective 
results.  Additional  bursts  may  be  necessary  if  it  becomes  apparent  from  the  subject’s 
continued  aggression  that  the  face  area  has  not  been  effectively  targeted  by  the  initial 
spray.  To prevent pressure  injury, do not spray  directly at the eyes at  distances  less than 
thirty-six (36) inches. 

•  A  subject  sprayed  with  pepper  gas  will  be  transported  to  the  nearest  fire  station  for  post 
exposure cleansing. This cleansing consists of rinsing with large quantities of cold water as 
soon  as  possible.  A  non-oil-based  soap  will  help  remove  the  resin  from  the  skin.  The 
affected area should be patted dry with a cloth towel. DO NOT RUB dry since rubbing will 
worsen the discomfort. A wet towel or ice packs may be used to reduce inflammation. 

If the subject is wearing contact lenses, have EMS or EMT-trained fire personnel remove the 
contact lenses. To prevent accidental injury due to stress, do not allow the exposed subject 
to remove the contacts. 

•  Further  medical  assistance  must  be  summoned  if  the  subject  displays  excessive  symptoms, 
such as respiratory distress, bleeding from the nose, or excessive redness. Medical attention 
must  also  be  sought  if  normal  symptoms  of  exposure  persist  more  than  forty-five  (45) 
minutes after exposure. 

• A supervisor will be notified and a Use of Force Report filed whenever pepper gas is used. The 

owner of an animal sprayed with pepper gas should be notified if the owner is known. 

Police Baton Guidelines 

While the courts have generally held that a police baton is not a deadly weapon, per se, it can 
be considered a deadly weapon depending on the manner and intent with  which  the  baton is 
used. 

•  A police  baton should not be used unless a situation is violent and injury  to  the  officer or a 

third party is likely. 

•  When  using  the  police  baton  to  subdue  a  subject,  an  officer  will  avoid  using  a  chokehold. 
Officers should only use a chokehold in those situations where it appears the officer would 
be authorized to use deadly force. 

• Striking blows should be aimed at areas where pain and minor injury may result, but critical 

injury is unlikely. When possible, blows to the head will be avoided. 

• When working in uniform officers shall carry a collapsible baton. 

Conducted Energy Device Guidelines 

Conducted energy devices are less lethal weapons that use battery energy to affect the sensory 
and/or motor systems. 

A conducted energy device shall only be used in response to active resistance, which is defined 
as the use of personal weapons (i.e. hands, feet, or other body parts) or weapons in order to 
assault or gain a positional advantage from which an assault is or would be likely. A conducted 
energy device must be used according to prescribed training and procedures. 

When  deploying  conducted  energy  devices,  officers  should  give  warning  to  the  suspect  and 
other officers, if feasible.  

Officers should avoid firing darts at a subjects head, neck and genital areas. 

When activating a conducted energy device, officers should use it for one standard cycle (five 
seconds)  and  stop  to  evaluate  the  situation.  If  subsequent  activations  are  necessary  the 
officer(s) should attempt to gain physical control or positional advantage of the subject during 
subsequent activation(s) unless approach would place the officer(s) at risk for serious physical 
injury  or  death.  Exposure  should  be  no  more  than  the  duration  necessary  to  secure  physical 
control of the subject. 

After  activation  of  a  conducted  energy  device,  medical  assistance  will  be  provided  for  anyone 
who  is  subjected  to  the  electrical  discharge.  Anyone  exposed  to  device  activation  will  receive 
on-scene  medical  attention  by  EMS.  Darts  that  penetrate  the  skin  should  be  treated  as  a 
biohazard. Law enforcement officers who have been trained in dart removal will remove darts 
unless  darts  are  in  a  vital  or  sensitive  area  (i.e.  eyes,  genitals,  groin,  head,  neck,  nipple,  or 
female breast). 

A  Use  of  Force  Report  will  be  completed  whenever  a  conducted  energy  device  is  used. 
Supervisors are required to respond and will ensure that photographs of the activation area and 
officer/suspect  injuries  are  taken.  The  officer  is  to  visually  inspect  the  darts  to  ensure  the 
complete dart was removed. A photograph of the darts shall be taken and submitted with the 
Use  of  Force  Report.  The  darts  should  be  disposed  of  as  a  biohazard.  Disposal  of  the  darts 
should  be  documented  in  the  case  report.  The  cartridge  and  at  least  one  (1)  AFID  is  to  be 
submitted as evidence until such time that Internal Affairs releases the items for destruction. If 
an animal is subjected to the electrical discharge, the owner of the animal should be notified, if 
known. A Use of Force Report will be completed when the laser of a conducted energy device is 
directed on a person. 

In the event that death or serious physical injury occurs, a supervisor will secure the device and 
ensure the scene is secure. The AFID tags are not to be picked up or disturbed in any manner. 
Departmental procedures for a death or serious physical injury will be followed. 

Any other time a conducted energy device is used, the officer is required to bring the device to 
the  Internal  Affairs  Unit  by  the  next  working  day  for  device  downloading.  The  used  cartridge 
and AFID tag will be collected as evidence and stored as such. In cases where there is a death 
or serious physical injury, a supervisor will secure the device and provide it to Internal Affairs. 

Conducted energy devices should not be used: 

• When the subject is only offering passive resistance, 

• As punishment, 

• In defense of “verbal” threats alone, 

•  Near  potentially  flammable,  volatile,  or  explosive  materials  to  include  alcohol-based  pepper 

gas, 

circumstances exist, 

themselves or others, 

•  On  pregnant  women,  elderly  persons,  young  children,  or  visibly  frail  persons  unless  exigent 

•  On  handcuffed  persons  unless  they  are  aggressively  resisting,  violent  and  likely  to  harm 

• When a subject is in physical control of a vehicle in motion/gear, 

• When a subject is in a location where a fall may cause serious physical injury or death, 

• To effect an investigative stop/detention, 

•  Simply  because  a  suspect  is  running  away  from  an  officer.  However,  a  conducted  energy 
device may be used if a subject is escaping by means of active resistance or the officer has 
probable cause to believe the subject is wanted for a violent felony. 

DISCHARGE OF CONDUCTED ENERGY DEVICE DOCUMENTATION 

The discharge of a conducted energy device by an officer, either deliberate or unintentional, is 
to be reported immediately to a supervisor (except during approved training). A detailed memo 
regarding the circumstances of the discharge is to be forwarded to the Internal Affairs Unit and 
the  Taser  Training  Coordinator  for  incidents  involving  the  unintentional  discharge  of  a 
conducted  energy  device.  The  Internal  Affairs  Unit  will  conduct  an  investigation  for  review  by 
the Deputy Chief of Police. A Use of Force Report will be completed for any other discharge of a 
conducted energy device. The conducted energy device is to be brought to the Internal Affairs 
Unit on the next business day, for a download.  

Knife Guidelines 

Officers are permitted to carry a tactical, folding knife, attached to their pant pocket. 

• For the purposes of this policy, a tactical, folding knife is defined as a pocket knife that is 
single-edged,  has  a  pocket  clip,  can  fold  inside  of  its  handle,  and  is  equipped  with  a 
locking  mechanism  once  the  blade  is  extended.  The  blade  length  will  not  exceed  4 
inches.  

• Tactical folding knives are equipped with a variety of opening mechanisms. Fully automatic 
openers, whereas a single button is depressed and the blade fully extends and locks, are 
not  legal  to  carry  in  North  Carolina  by  either  sworn  personnel  or  civilians.  Therefore 
officers will not carry such knives. 

• Tactical folding knives are carried for use as a utility tool for officers.  

• Tactical folding knives may be carried at the officer’s discretion.  

Officers  are  permitted  to  carry  a  fixed-blade  knife  in  a  low  profile  manner,  meaning  the 
character and intent of the fixed-blade knife is not immediately apparent. Within the parameters 
described below, a fixed blade knife may be carried in the belt, vest, or boot area. 

•  For  purposes  of  this  policy,  a  fixed  blade  knife  is  defined  as  any  knife  with  a  blade  and 
handle permanently joined, incapable of folding. One or both edges is/are sharpened for 
cutting and/or puncturing. 

• Officers should use a fixed-blade knife as a weapon only and as a last resort, when other 

means have failed or are inapplicable. 

• The fixed-blade knife, unlike the tactical folding knife described above, may only be used 
in  deadly  force  encounters  when  the  officer’s  primary  deadly  weapon  (his/her  firearm) 
has been compromised, inaccessible, or will not function. 

• The fixed-blade knife shall not exceed (5) five inches in overall length (tip of the handle to 
tip of the blade). The fixed-blade knife must be secured in a retention  device (sheath) 
designed specifically for the fixed-blade knife. The retention device with the fixed-blade 
knife may be attached to the under belt, duty belt, boot, or vest. The retention device 
with  the  fixed-blade  knife  must  also  blend  in  color,  size,  and  overall  proportions  with 
departmentally issued duty gear, so as to maintain the “low-profile” mandate. 

•  If  the  fixed-blade  knife  is  worn  on  the  belt,  it  shall  be  worn  on  the  front  portion  of  the 
body, between the hips. It cannot extend above the height of the magazine pouches on 
the  officer’s  duty  belt,  nor  below  the  bottom  of  the  belt  itself.  If  worn  on  the  ballistic 
vest, it must not interfere with the proper fitting and wearing of the vest. If worn on the 
boot,  the  fixed-blade  knife  must  be  secured  to  the  boot  through  the  laces  or  an 
attachment specifically designed for the boot. Regardless of where the fixed blade knife 
is worn, it must be easily accessible to the officer in a deadly force encounter in which 
the fixed-blade knife’s use would be justified. 

• Drawing the fixed-blade knife from its sheath will be considered a use of force, thus the 

applicable Use of Force Reports shall be completed. 

•  Fixed-blade knives are optional for  officers. However those who choose  to carry  a  fixed-
blade  knife  are  required  to  attend  a  mandatory,  (4)  four  hour  training  class  at  the 
Raleigh Police Training Center. 

Firearms Guidelines 

Officers should use a firearm as a last resort, when other means have failed or are inapplicable. 

•  Officers  may  not  discharge  their  firearms  except  where  the  use  of  deadly  force  would  be 

justified or during approved firearm training. 

• Warning shots are not permitted. 

• Firing a weapon from a moving vehicle is prohibited. 

• Firing a weapon while running is prohibited except where the officer reasonably believes that 
there  is  an  imminent  threat  of  serious  bodily  injury  or  death  to  him/herself  or  to  a  third 
party if the officer does not use deadly force. Before discharging a firearm while running, an 
officer must believe that the only reasonable means of protecting him/herself and/or a third 
party is the use of deadly force. 

Discharging a firearm at a moving vehicle involves a possible risk of death or serious injury to 
innocent persons. The safety of innocent people is jeopardized when a suspect is disabled and 
loses  control  of  his  or  her  vehicle.  There  may  be  a  risk  of  harm  to  occupants  of  the  suspect 
vehicle who may not be involved, or involved to a lesser extent, with the actions of the suspect 
creating the threat. 

Due to the risks and considering that firearms are not generally effective in bringing a moving 
vehicle  to a rapid halt, officers  shall not fire at a moving vehicle unless  the  officer  reasonably 
believes: 

•  The  use  or  imminent  use  of  deadly  force  other  than  the  vehicle  is  being  used  against  the 

officer or another person;  

•  Or,  there  exists  an  imminent  risk  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  to  the  officer  or  another 
person by an on-coming vehicle and no other means are available at that time to avoid or 
eliminate the danger because the vehicle is driving directly toward the officer or third person 
and there is no avenue of escape. 

An officer should not intentionally position himself or herself in the path of an oncoming vehicle. 
Whenever possible, officers should take reasonable steps to get out of harm’s way if a vehicle is 
moving towards them. 

Euthanization of Animals 

If a  domesticated animal is badly injured and requires relief from suffering,  an  animal  control 
officer should be notified. The animal will be transported to the after hours clinic. 

If  an  undomesticated  animal  is  injured  badly  and  requires  relief  from  suffering,  the  watch 
commander  may  authorize  an  officer  (at  or  above  the  rank  of  First  Class)  to  euthanize  the 

animal  with  the  officer’s  departmentally  issued  handgun.  When  euthanizing  the  animal,  the 
officer will ensure a safe line of fire and take care to avoid the possible deflection of projectiles. 
The officer shall attempt to minimize civilian exposure to the euthanization. 

DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS REPORT 

The discharge of any firearm by an officer, either deliberate or unintentional, is to be reported 
immediately to a supervisor (except during approved firearms training). For incidents involving 
the  discharge  of  a  firearm,  a  Discharge  of  Firearms  Report  is  to  be  forwarded  to  the  Internal 
Affairs Unit, which will conduct an investigation for review by the Deputy Chief of Police.  

If a firearm is discharged as a result of an undomesticated animal euthanization, the officer will 
complete the Field Euthanization of Undomesticated Animal Report (in lieu of the Discharge of 
Firearms  Report)  which  will  be  reviewed  by  the  division  commander  and  forwarded  to  the 
Internal Affairs Unit. 

USE OF FORCE/COMPLAINT OF INJURY INCIDENTS 

Use of Force/Complaint of Injury Reports 

•  Incidents  involving  the  use  of  force  or  complaint  of  injury  by  civilians  are  to  be  reported  as 
soon as possible to a supervisor. An electronic, web-based Use of Force/Complaint of Injury 
Report should be completed by the involved officer. Digital photographs should be attached 
to  the  report  and  should,  at  a  minimum,  depict  the  involved  officer  and  the  civilian.  A 
supervisor,  who  was  not  involved  in  the  use  of  force,  usually  a  sergeant,  should 
electronically  review  the  report,  make  a  recommendation,  and  forward  the  report  through 
the chain of command utilizing the web-based reporting system. A lieutenant or captain may 
forward the report directly to the division commander. After review by the Deputy Chief of 
Police, these reports will be maintained by the Internal Affairs Unit. 

Use  of  Force/Complaint  of  Injury  Reports  are  not  public  records.  They  are  used  to  document 
and  evaluate  employee  performance.  These  reports  will  be  evaluated  to  determine:  whether 
administrative or criminal investigations are warranted; whether there is  adherence to policies 
and procedures; and/or, whether there are needs for amended or remedial training.  

Completing Use of Force/Complaint of Injury Reports 

Generally, Use of Force/Complaint of Injury Reports should be completed whenever there is a 
greater than normal amount of force required in subduing a subject. Use of Force/Complaint of 
Injury Reports should be completed for, but not limited to, the following occurrences: 

• Whenever an officer discharges a firearm or points his/her weapon at a subject. Officers who 
unholster  their  firearm  and  maintain  it  in  a  low  ready  position  or  at  their  side,  in  a  non-
threatening  manner,  are  not  required  to  complete  a  Use  of  Force/Complaint  of  Injury 
Report. 

• Whenever restraining techniques are used that exceed the mere touching of a suspect in order 
to handcuff or to guide to a new location. For example, taking a suspect to the ground in 
order to complete an arrest will require a Use of Force/Complaint of Injury Report. 

• Whenever pepper gas is used. 

• Whenever striking techniques are used on a subject. 

•  Whenever  a  conducted  energy  device  is  activated  or  when  the  conducted  energy  device  is 

directed on an individual. 

•  Whenever  there  is  an  injury  or  complaint  of  injury  to  a  subject  regardless  of  the  level  of 
physical force used. This includes inadvertent injuries caused by proximity exposure to noise 
and  flash  distraction  devices.  Although  not  considered  a  use  of  force,  a  Use  of 
Force/Complaint of Injury report would be applicable when injury results from departmental 
canines who are protecting their handler or conducting off-lead building searches. 

Injuries Resulting from Use of Force 

If injury to a subject occurs from the use of lethal or non-lethal force, the officer is responsible 
for seeing that medical attention is made available to the arrestee prior to his/her incarceration. 

Bleeding, vomiting, unconsciousness, complaints of dizziness or blurred vision, are some of the 
apparent  signs  of  injury  that  should  prompt  the  officer  to  seek  medical  assistance.  Officers 
should  be  attentive  to  signs  of  excited  delirium  and  if  observed  seek  immediate  medical 
attention.  

Temporary Removal from Line-Duty 

Any employee whose actions or use of force results in death or serious bodily injury will be 
temporarily removed from line duty pending the completion of an administrative review (See 
1105-3 “Officer Involved Shootings and In-Custody Deaths” 

