Effective Date: 8/93
Revision 1 Date: 7/26/96
Revision 2 Date: 5/21/97
Revision 3 Date: 6/1/99
Revision 4 Date: 1/5/00
Revision 5 Date: 5/9/2002
Revision 6 Date: 2/2/04
Revision 7 Date: 11/1/04
Approval:

________________________
Russ Leach
Chief of Police

4.30

USE OF FORCE POLICY: 

A.

PURPOSE:

The  Police  Department's  primary  function  is  to  protect  the  rights  of  all  persons  within  its
jurisdiction to be free from criminal attack, secure in their possessions, and to live in a peaceful
atmosphere.  In order for the Department to carry out this function, police officers may be
required to use physical force.  It is in the public interest that this Department's officers be
guided by a Use of Force Policy which is fair, appropriate, and creates public confidence
in the law enforcement profession.  The application of physical force, and the type of force
employed, depends on the situation as perceived by the officer.  The purpose of this policy is
to provide guidance as to when physical force may be employed, and the type of physical force
that the law will permit.  However, policy cannot cover every possible situation presented to
officers.  Therefore, officers must be reasonable in their actions.

B.

PHILOSOPHY:

The use of force by law enforcement personnel is a matter of critical concern both to the public
and the law enforcement community.  Officers are involved on a daily basis in numerous and
varied human encounters, and when warranted to do so, may use force in carrying out their
duties.

Officers  must  have  an  understanding  of,  and  true  appreciation  for,  the  limitations  on  their
authority,  particularly with respect to overcoming resistance from those with whom they come
in official contact.

This  Department  recognizes  and  respects  the  sanctity  of  human  life  and  dignity.    Vesting
officers with authority to use force to protect the public welfare requires a very careful balancing
of the rights of all human beings and the interests involved in a particular situation.

C.

POLICY:

The Department's Use of Force Policy is as follows:

In a complex urban society, officers are confronted daily with situations where control must be
exercised to effect arrests and to protect the public safety.  Control may be achieved through
verbalization techniques such as advice, warnings, and persuasion, or by the use of physical
force.  Officers are permitted to use whatever force that is reasonable to protect others or
themselves  from  bodily  harm.    The  Department's  Use  of  Force  Policy  must  comply  with
applicable California and federal law.  California Penal Code Section 835a states that an officer
who has reasonable cause to believe that a person to be arrested has committed a public
offense may use reasonable force to effect the arrest, prevent escape, or overcome resistance.
A peace officer who makes or attempts to make an arrest need not retreat or desist from
his or her efforts by reason of resistance or threatened resistance of the person being
arrested; nor shall such officer be deemed an aggressor or lose his or her right to self-

4.30 - 1

D.

ESCALATION/DE-ESCALATION OF FORCE:

defense by the use of reasonable force to effect the arrest or to prevent escape or to
overcome resistance. 

 Each situation explicitly requires the use of force to be reasonable and only that force which
reasonably appears to be necessary may be used to gain control or resist attack.  Mere verbal
threats of violence, verbal abuse, or hesitancy by the suspect in following commands do not,
in and of themselves, justify the use of physical force without additional facts or circumstances
which, taken together, pose a threat of harm to the officer or others.  Officers must be prudent
when applying any of the use of force techniques.  Unreasonable application of physical force
is a violation of California and federal law which may result in criminal prosecution and/or civil
liability for the officer.  A violation of the Department's use of force policy may also subject the
officer to Departmental discipline.  Officers should clearly understand that the standard for
determining whether or not the force applied was reasonable is that conduct which a reasonable
peace officer would exercise based upon the information the officer had when the conduct
occurred.  Officers must pay careful attention to the facts and circumstances of each particular
case, including the severity of the crime at issue, whether the suspect poses an immediate
threat to the safety of the officers or others, and whether he/she is actively resisting arrest or
attempting to evade arrest by flight.

Furthermore, the Department expects officer(s) to use the most appropriate force option given
the circumstances.  The decision should take into account the situation facing the officer as well
as his/her training and experience.

The primary objective of the application of force is to ensure the control of a suspect with such
force as is objectively reasonable under the circumstances.  Ideally, officers should attempt to
control  a  suspect  through  advice,  warning,  or  persuasion,  but  be  prepared  for  the  use  of
physical force.  The types of force an officer may utilize will vary, depending on the aggressive
behavior or degree of resistance used by a suspect and the tactical practicability of a particular
use of force technique.  In situations when physical force is applied, an officer must escalate
or de-escalate to the amount of force which reasonably appears to be necessary to overcome
the suspect's resistance and to gain control.

The  concept  of  escalation  and  de-escalation  of  physical  force  must  be  put  into  a  proper
perspective so that officers can effectively handle all types of resistant suspects.  There are
three key points regarding the concept of escalation and de-escalation of physical force.

1.

2.

3.

Physical force is used to control a suspect;

Whenever force is used, the officer's defensive reactions must be in response to the
suspect's actions;

NOTE: This does not mean that an officer has to wait until a suspect attacks.  Based
on the circumstances, an officer may be justified in using reasonable force to prevent
an attack.

An officer may use only the amount of force which  reasonably appears to be necessary
to control the suspect.  The Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution
requires  that  police  officers  use  only  such  force  as  is  objectively  reasonable
under  the  circumstances.    Officers  need  not  avail  themselves  of  the  least
intrusive means of responding to an exigent situation; they need only act within
that range of conduct identified as reasonable.

4.30 - 2

E.

USE OF FORCE TECHNIQUES:

The ability to successfully execute the proper control technique when attempting to control a
suspect is essential for officer safety.  The following use of force techniques  are described in
general indicating the six (6) approved levels of force to control suspects under increasing
resistant actions.  Each technique is fully described in a separate training bulletin.

Level 1:  Presence:

California Penal Code Section 834a states that if a person has knowledge, or by the exercise
of reasonable care, should have knowledge that they are being arrested by a peace officer, it
is the duty of such person to refrain from using force or any weapon to resist such arrest.  In
addition, Section 148 makes it a crime to willfully resist, delay, or obstruct a peace officer in the
performance of their duties.

Consequently, the mere presence of a uniformed or other appropriately identified officer,
coupled with good verbal communication, will generally gain the willful submission
necessary to avoid a further escalation of force.

Level 2:  Verbalization:

Verbalization, "talking a suspect to jail,” is the most commonly used technique to effect the
arrest  of  a  suspect.    Verbalization  may  be  advising,  warning,  or  persuading.    Actual  field
experience  demonstrates  that  certain  techniques  of  verbalization,  coupled  with  an
advantageous position, and a mature, professional attitude can prevent further escalation of a
situation.  These techniques include:

explaining any actions about to be taken;

allowing a suspect to save face in front of his/her peers;

recognizing a suspect's remarks are not a personal attack against the officer; and 

allowing a suspect to retain dignity whenever possible.

Officers should attempt to de-escalate confrontations by utilizing verbalization techniques prior
to, during, and after any use of physical force.

Level 3:  Empty Hand Control:

Empty hand control is generally used to counter a weaponless suspect's passive or active
resistance to an officer's verbal commands.  Firm grip and control techniques were designed
to  safely  initiate  physical  contact  and  gain  control  of  an  uncooperative  suspect.    When
verbalization proves ineffective, a firm grip may be all that is necessary to overcome resistance.
If the use of a firm grip is unsuccessful, an officer may decide to utilize a control technique as
a restraint or come-a-long hold.

When the suspect's physical actions become actively resistant to a point which prevents the
officer  from  gaining  control  or  effecting  an  arrest,  more  aggressive  countermeasures  may
become necessary.  At this level of force, these techniques consist of: 

!

!

!

!

 

!

!

avoidance,

blocks,

4.30 - 3

!

!

!

!

!

!

empty hand control holds such as:  wrist lock, twist lock, finger flex, arm bar and escort
position,

pressure points,

controlled take downs such as:  leg sweep, hip throw, front leg wrap, front and rear take
downs, figure four and wrist turn-out,

and ground tactics (using the officer’s body weight and/or any combination of empty
hand control holds to control the subject), 

and are designed to create a temporary dysfunction of the suspect and allow the officer the
opportunity to gain the advantage.

Level 4:

Chemical Irritant/Electrical Control Devices/Team Take Down/ Carotid
Restraint:  

Officers should remain mindful that the use of force options described in Level 4, below, are
described in order of preference where time and circumstances allow the officer to consider
various options.  This is based on the affected officer(s) having the time and ability to weigh the
circumstances and avoid direct physical engagement (team take downs and carotid restraints.)
Whenever possible and where practical, officers are encouraged to employ those techniques
that do not require them to directly physically engage the subject so as to minimize risk to both
the officer and the subject.

Chemical irritant may be used to overcome and control a suspect’s aggressive actions when
verbalization is unsuccessful.  Verbal threats of violence by a suspect do not alone justify the
use of chemical irritants.  Chemical irritant may be used if the officer reasonably believes that
it would be unsafe to approach and control the suspect.  When it is tactically unwise to entangle
with the suspect, and it is desirous to maintain a distance, chemical irritant may prove to be
useful.

Currently, the only Electrical Control Device which is departmentally approved is the Taser.  The
Taser is a non-lethal control device which may be used to control violent or potentially violent
suspects when an officer reasonably believes the following conditions exist:

Deadly force does not appear to be justifiable and/or necessary, and

There is a reasonable expectation that it will be unsafe for officers to approach and
place themselves within range of the suspect.

The team takedown is another intermediate force tool utilized to reduce risk of injury to officers
and arrestees while achieving maximum control.  Two or three man takedown teams under the
direction of one leader move as a unit and make contact with the arrestee simultaneously.
Contact should not be made until all other lesser levels of control have been exhausted and
sufficient officers are present to minimize risk of injury to the officers and arrestee.

The  Carotid  Restraint  Control  Hold  offers  peace  officers  a  method  for  controlling  violently
resisting suspects when higher levels of force may not be justified.

The Carotid Restraint Control Hold should not be confused with the bar-arm choke hold or any
other form of choke hold where pressure is applied to restrict the flow of air into the body by
compression of the airway at the front of the throat.

Choke holds are considered ineffective and create the potential for a suspect to panic and react
with greater resistence when pressure is applied in this manner by a peace officer.  Also, there

4.30 - 4

is greater risk of serious injury to the suspect.  Choke holds shall not be used by any member
of this department.

The  carotid  restraint  may  be  utilized  to  control  a  violently  resisting  suspect,  and  allows  for
control against varying degrees of resistance.  Once the technique is applied, the officer has the
capability of restraining the subject by using only that degree of force which is reasonable to
control the suspect.  Caution should be exercised to prevent a disadvantageous position which
might expose the officer’s baton and/or firearm to the suspect.  Any time a carotid restraint is
applied, whether or not  the suspect is rendered unconscious, an O.K. to Book shall be obtained
as soon as practical and prior to booking. 

Level 5:

Intermediate Weapons:

Intermediate  weapons  are  utilized  to  immediately  impede  the  threatening  actions  of  an
aggressive suspect.  They consist of:

personal body weapons such as palm heel strike, common fist, bottom fist strike, elbow
strike, knee strike, front kick, side kick, roundhouse kick,

impact weapons such as PR-24, expandable baton, mid-range baton, short billy, riot
baton and flashlight,

!

!

!

!

!

less lethal munitions

improvised weapons

and  other  self-defense  techniques  designed  to  protect  the  officer  and/or  innocent
citizens from bodily harm.  

These weapons are generally used when lethal force is not justified and lesser levels of force
have been, or will likely be, ineffective in the situation.

The baton may be appropriately displayed as a show of force if verbalization techniques appear
to be ineffective when used on an aggressive suspect.  A decision to draw or exhibit a baton
must  be  based  on  the  tactical  situation.    For  example,  the  drawing  of  a  baton  may  be
reasonable in a situation of an officer entering a bar or other location of prior disturbance calls,
or exhibiting the baton in a situation where there is an escalating risk to the officer's safety.  If
the situation continues to escalate, the baton can provide a viable method of controlling the
suspect.    The  baton  was  designed  as  an  impact  weapon  and  should  be  used  for  striking
movements and blocks.  Caution shall be used to avoid striking those areas such as the
head, throat, neck, spine or groin which may  cause serious injury to the suspect.

In situations when use of the baton is applicable, the front, side, rear, and round house kicks
can be applied as alternate use of force techniques when attempting control of an aggressive
suspect.

Another  alternative  to  the  use  of  the  baton  as  an  impact  weapon  is  the  flashlight.    While
certainly  not  preferred  over  the  baton  in  most  situations,  the  flashlight  is  usually  readily
available, especially at night, and may be appropriate at times when the baton is not accessible
or too cumbersome.  Nevertheless, should this choice be made within an intermediate use of
force situation, caution shall be used to avoid striking those areas such as the head, throat,
neck, spine or groin which may  cause serious injury to the suspect.

Generally, the deployment of less lethal munitions should have the goal to restore order and/or
reduce the risk of more serious injury. Incidents where deployment may be an option include,
but are not limited to, the following:

4.30 - 5

!

!

!

!

!

!

1.

2.

Restoration or maintenance of order during a jail or civil disturbance.

Safely controlling violent persons.

Subduing vicious animals.

Situations wherein the authorizing person deems their use necessary to safely
resolve the incident.

Depending on circumstances, less lethal weapons can be used to safely control  violent  or
potentially violent suspects when the officer reasonably believes the following conditions exist:

Attempts to control the incident with lesser force options have been, or will likely be
ineffective in the situation, and

There is a reasonable expectation that it would be tactically unwise for officers to
approach or place themselves in range of the suspect.

Level 6:

Lethal Force:

If the situation becomes life threatening, the officer would be compelled to escalate to the
ultimate level of force.  The use of lethal force is a last resort dictated by the actions of a suspect
where the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the suspect poses a significant
threat of death or serious physical injury to the officer or others.  The weapon of choice
in these situations is generally one of the various departmentally approved firearms.  However,
this does not preclude officers from using any reasonable means to protect themselves or
other persons from this immediate and significant threat of death or serious physical injury.
Furthermore, where the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the suspect poses a threat
of serious physical harm, either to the officer or to others, it is reasonable to prevent escape by
using  lethal  force.    Thus,  if  the  suspect  threatens  the  officer  with  a  weapon  or  there  is
reasonable cause to believe that the suspect has committed a crime involving the infliction or
threatened infliction of serious physical harm, lethal force may be used if necessary to prevent
escape, and if, where feasible, some warning has been given.
The use of less lethal munitions is neither encouraged nor discouraged in deadly force
situations.    Officers  must  evaluate  each  situation  by  the  facts  and  circumstances
confronting them.  Less lethal force should not be considered a substitute for deadly
force in lethal situations. 

USE OF FIREARMS

Firearms shall be used only when an officer believes his/her life or the life of another is in
imminent danger, or in danger of great bodily harm, or when all other reasonable means of
apprehension have failed to prevent the escape of a felony suspect whom the officer has reason
to believe presents a serious danger to others where the felonious conduct includes the use or
threatened use of deadly force.

Drawing  Firearm:  Officers  shall  only  draw  their  sidearm  or  shotgun  when  there  is
likelihood of danger to the officer or other persons.

Discharge of Firearm: An officer of this Department shall not discharge a firearm or
use any other type of deadly force in the performance of his/her duties, except under
the following circumstances:

a.

In  the  necessary  defense  of  himself/herself  or  any  other  person  who  is  in
imminent danger of death or great bodily harm.

4.30 - 6

Where the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the suspect poses a
threat of serious physical harm, either to the officer or to others, it is reasonable
to prevent escape by using lethal force.    Thus,  if  the  suspect  threatens  the
officer with a weapon or there is reasonable cause to believe that the suspect
has committed a crime involving the infliction or threatened infliction of serious
physical harm, lethal force may be used if necessary to prevent escape, and if,
where feasible, some warning has been given.

To kill a dangerous animal that is attacking the officer or another person or
persons, or which if allowed to escape, presents a danger to the public.

When humanity requires the destruction of an animal to save it from further
suffering, and other disposition is not possible.

For target practice at an approved range or in unrestricted areas.

To give an alarm or call assistance for an important purpose when no other
means are available.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

a.

3.

Display and Discharge of Firearms Prohibited:

Officers shall not display their firearms or draw them in any public place except
for  inspection  or  use,  nor  shall  officers  handle  their  weapons  in  a  careless
manner which could result in an accidental discharge of the firearm.

b.

A member of the Department shall not discharge a firearm as a warning shot.

c.          Generally, a member of the department should not discharge a firearm at or
from a moving vehicle unless in the necessary defense of himself/herself or any
other person who is in imminent danger of death or great bodily harm.  If an
officer has reasonable cause to believe the suspect poses a threat of serious
physical  harm,  either  to  the  officer  or  to  others,  it  is  reasonable  to  prevent
escape by using lethal force.  If the suspect threatens the officer with a weapon
or  there  is  reasonable  cause  to  believe  that  the  suspect  has  committed  a
serious crime involving the infliction or threatened infliction of serious physical
harm, lethal force may be used if necessary to prevent escape, and if, where
feasible, some warning has been given.

4.

5.

Juvenile Felony Suspects: An officer generally should not shoot at a fleeing felon
whom he has reasonable grounds to believe is a juvenile.

This section does not limit an officer’s right of self-defense or his defense of others
whose  lives  he  reasonably  believes  are  in  imminent  peril,  except  as  provided  in
paragraph 2 a or b above.

Acting as a Peace Officer While Off Duty or in Other Jurisdictions:  Officers are
reminded that as employees of this Department, the policies set forth here are in force
whether or not officers are on duty in this City or on special or casual assignment in
another legal jurisdiction or when off duty, but acting as a police officer.

F.

OVERVIEW OF TECHNIQUES:

When a suspect physically attacks an officer, the officer must act in self defense using one or
more of the previously mentioned control techniques within approved use of force standards.
Consider a situation wherein a suspect assumes a clenched fists fighting stance some distance

4.30 - 7

from the officer.  The officer counters by drawing his baton as a show of force.  At this time, the
suspect drops his hands, resumes a normal posture, and submits to arrest.  Although an officer
must proceed with extreme caution, maintaining an advantageous position and ensuring that
no additional threat exists, they should de-escalate all the way back to verbalization.  Therefore,
since the suspect is now cooperating, the officer reacts accordingly by advising, warning, and
persuading.

The increased amount of force used by a suspect requires an officer to escalate the degree of
force needed to maintain control of the situation.  Note, however, that an officer is permitted
by law to not only use the level of force used by the suspect but to use reasonable force
to overcome the resistance.  As a suspect's use of force declines, the officer's reaction must
also decline.  The reasonable amount of force needed to control a suspect may vary from one
officer to another.

G.

SITUATION-BASED USE OF FORCE CONTINUUM:

The  Department  recognizes  that  building  flexibility  into  an  officer's  determination  of  the
appropriate use of force is advisable and acceptable - if not essential - given that the standard
for  evaluating  an  officer's  use  of  force  claims  is  reasonableness  under  the  facts  and
circumstances known to the officer at the time.  This is an affirmative stance by the Department
designed  to  provide  additional  confidence  and  needed  support  to  officers  in  making  their
decisions regarding use of force in the field.

A number of factors are taken into consideration when an officer selects force options, and
when evaluating whether an officer has used reasonable force.  The Department recognizes
that officers are expected to make split-second decisions and that the amount of time available
to evaluate and respond to a situation may impact the officer's decisions.  By establishing a
policy  that  includes  a  use  of  force  continuum  the  Department  hopes  to  provide  additional
guidance to officers in making those split-second decision.  Examples of facts which may affect
an officer's force option selection include, but are not limited to:

Officer/subject factors (age, size, relative strength, skill level, injury/exhaustion, number
of officers versus number of subjects)

!

!

!

!

!

!

Influence of drugs or alcohol

Proximity to weapons

Availability of other options

Seriousness of the offense in question

Other exigent circumstances

Finally, it is important to note that an officer need not attempt to gain control over an individual
by use of the lowest level of force on the continuum when reason dictates and the officer can
articulate that a higher level of force is reasonable.  Likewise, the skipping of steps may be
appropriate given the resistance encountered.

Simply put, this continuum should be viewed as an elevator, not a ladder - an officer may go
directly to any level of the continuum provided that the force selected is reasonable.

H.

MENTAL ATTITUDE:

Officers  must  realize  that  emotional  involvement  is  also  a  factor  in  the  escalation  or  de-
escalation of force.  In order to react to every situation with the reasonable amount of force, an

4.30 - 8

officer must be in good physical condition, possess self defense and verbalization skills, and
have a mature, professional attitude.  Additionally, officers must have self confidence in their
training and ability to control the situation.

I.

REPORTABLE USE OF FORCE INCIDENTS:

1.

A  reportable  use  of  force  incident  is  defined  as  an  incident  in  which  any  on-duty
Department  employee,  or  off  duty  employee  whose  occupation  as  a  Department
employee is a factor, uses a  less lethal control device or any physical force to:

Compel a person to comply with the employee's directions; or

Overcome resistance by a suspect during an arrest or a detention; or

Defend themselves or any person from an aggressive action by a suspect.

Reportable Use of Force does not include:

The mere presence and identification of police officer status; or

The use of a firm grip hold which does not result in an injury,  complaint of
injury, or complaint of pain; or

That force necessary to overcome passive resistance due to physical disability
or intoxication which does not result in injury,  complaint of injury, or complaint
of pain; or

Control holds utilized in conjunction with handcuffing and searching techniques
which do not result in injury, complaint of injury, or complaint of pain, and did not
require any other reportable use of force; or

Injuries sustained by a subject as a sole consequence of his/her actions such
as, but not limited to, falling while fleeing from officer(s); or

Shooting  of  an  animal  as  otherwise  permitted  by  the  Riverside  Police
Department Policy and Procedures Manual; or

Use of Departmentally approved diversion or entry devices, deployed to gain
entry into a structure.

2.

Employee Responsibilities:

Any member who becomes involved in a reportable use of force incident or discharges
a  firearm,  Taser,  or  chemical  irritant  control  device  for  any  reason,  other  than  an
approved training exercise,  shall:

Summon medical aid, as needed;

Immediately notify a supervisor that they have been involved in a use of force
incident;
If the force used falls within Level 6 and/or results in death or serious likelihood
of  death,  the  employee  shall  adhere  to  the  provisions  of  Section  4.8  of  the
Riverside Police Department Policy and Procedures Manual.

Report the full details of the use of force incident in the related Department
arrest or crime report;

4.30 - 9

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

a.

b.

c.

d.

Use a Department "memorandum" form to report the full details of the use of
force incident when a crime or arrest report is not required;

When off duty, notify the Watch Commander immediately.  

3.

Supervisor Responsibilities:

The notified or designated supervisor shall:

Confirm medical aid has been summoned, as needed.

Respond to the scene, independently investigate the use of force and make a
report of the incident.

If the force used falls within Level 6 and/or results in death or serious likelihood
of death, the supervisor shall notify the Watch Commander immediately and
adhere  to  the  provisions  of  Section  4.8  of  the  Riverside  Police  Department
Policy and Procedures Manual.  The Watch Commander shall make additional
notifications in accordance with Section 4.8.

Photographs shall be taken in all reportable use of force incidents that result in
an injury, or a complaint of injury.  If practicable, photographs of the subject and
the injury should be taken after the injury or wound is cleansed by medical
personnel and before medical treatment, if any is necessary.  Care should be
taken to protect the subject's personal privacy interests.  Any possible concerns
should be discussed with a field supervisor prior to taking the photographs.

e.

The investigating supervisor shall report the incident as follows:

1.

A  “Supervisor  Use  of  Force  Report”  form  shall  be  completed  within
twenty four (24) hours and forwarded to the Office of Internal Affairs,
when the force used was within Level 3, 4, or 5 of this policy.  

!

!

!

!

The “Supervisor Use of Force Report” form shall be sufficient
documentation of a Use of Force incident when the force used
did  not  result  in  an  injury  or  complaint  of  injury.    A  simple
complaint of pain, without evidence of underlying injury, may
properly  be  documented  on  the  “Supervisor  Use  of  Force
Report” form.

The supervisor shall complete a separate “Supervisor Use of
Force  Report”  form  for  each  subject  upon  whom  force  was
used.  Each report shall include the force levels used by each
officer involved in the incident.

2.

A “Use of Force Investigation Memorandum” shall be completed within
ten (10) days to supplement the “Supervisor Use of Force Report” form
and forwarded to the Office of Internal Affairs when:

The force used was the direct cause of injury or complaint of
injury, beyond a simple complaint of pain.

The force used involved the application of a carotid restraint,
chemical  irritant,  electrical  control  device  or  similar  control
technique/device.

4.30 - 10

!

The force used falls within Level 5.

f.

g.

h.

Internal Affairs shall have the responsibility to prepare all administrative reports
of incidents wherein the force used falls within Level 6 and/or death or serious
likelihood  of  death  results.    Field  supervisors  shall  not  prepare  any
administrative reports of such incidents unless directed by Internal Affairs.

Use of force reports will be designated for inclusion into the Early Warning
System  (EWS)  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section  4.55  of  the
Riverside Police Department Policy and Procedures Manual.

Alternative methods of reporting uses of force may be utilized during incidents
of civil unrest.  The incident commander shall make this determination and
specify the reporting method to be utilized.

J.

CONCLUSION:

The decision to use physical force places a tremendous responsibility on the officer.  There is
no one capable of advising an officer on how to react in every situation that may occur.  Ideally,
all situations would require only verbalization.  While the control of a suspect through advice,
warning, or persuasion is preferable, the use of physical force to control a suspect is sometimes
unavoidable.  Officers must be able to escalate or de-escalate the amount of force  which
reasonably appears to be necessary to control a situation as the suspect's resistance increases
or  decreases.    Force  should  only  be  used  as  a  reasonable  means  to  secure  control  of  a
suspect.

4.30 - 11

