 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

580.02 
USE OF FORCE 
9-18-19 

 
PURPOSE 
 
The  purpose  of  this  order  is  to  outline  procedures  for  the  use  and  application  of  force,  as  well  as  the 
procedures  for  after-force  medical  care  and  for  the  reporting,  investigation  and  review  of  incidents  after  an 
application of force. 
 
POLICY 
 
The Sacramento Police Department values the sanctity of human life and the freedoms guaranteed by the 
United States and California constitutions.  An officer shall only use the amount of force that the officer 
reasonably believes is necessary under the totality of the circumstances.  An officer shall consider the 
principles of proportionality in looking at the totality of the circumstances by weighing the severity of the 
offense, the reasonably perceived level of resistance and the need for apprehension prior to the utilization of 
force.  An officer shall use only the force that is reasonable to effect an arrest, prevent escape, or to overcome 
resistance.  During these situations, an officer shall continually evaluate their tactics when determining the 
appropriate use of force response. If necessary, an officer shall render, if properly trained, or otherwise 
request medical aid as soon as reasonably possible.  
 
An officer shall employ de-escalation and crisis intervention techniques when feasible and when doing so 
does not increase the risk of harm to officers or others. When making use of force decisions, an officer 
should be mindful that subjects may be physically or mentally incapable of responding to police 
commands due to a variety of circumstances including, but not limited to, alcohol or drugs, mental 
impairment, medical conditions, or language and cultural barriers.   
 
Officers use deadly force only when necessary in defense of human life or serious bodily injury. The 
decision by an officer to use force shall be evaluated from the perspective of a reasonable officer in the 
same situation, based on the totality of the circumstances known to or perceived by the officer at the 
time, rather than with the benefit of hindsight, and that the totality of the circumstances shall account for 
occasions when officers may be forced to make quick judgments about using force.  The Sacramento 
Police Department shall evaluate the use of force used by its employees to ensure officers only use force 
that is lawful and consistent with this policy.   
 
PROCEDURE 

A.  DEFINITIONS 

1.  IMMINENT THREAT - An imminent threat is considered to exist if a suspect has demonstrated actions 
that  would  lead  one  to  reasonably  believe  that  the  suspect  will  continue  to  pose  a  threat  if  not 
apprehended without delay.  A person is an imminent threat if the officer reasonably believes that the 
person  has  the  present  intent,  means,  opportunity  and  ability  to  complete  the  threat  regardless  of 
whether the threatened action has been initiated. 

2.  FEASIBLE  -  “Feasible”  means  reasonably  capable  of  being  done  or  carried  out  under  the 
circumstances to successfully achieve the arrest or lawful objective without increasing risk to the officer 
or another person. 

3.  TOTALITY OF CIRCUMSTANCES – All facts known to the officer at the time, including the conduct of 

the officer and the subject leading up the use of force. 

4.  PROPORTIONALITY  -  When  determining  the  appropriate  level  of  force,  an  officer  shall  balance  the 
severity of the offense committed, the threat to public safety and the level of force needed to overcome 
resistance based on the totality of the circumstances known to, or perceived by, the officer at the time. 

GO 580.02 
Page 1 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

5.  DE-ESCALATION - Employing techniques to stabilize a situation, to decrease the likelihood of the need 
to use force, and to increase the likelihood of voluntary compliance. De-escalation techniques include, 
but are not limited to, gathering information about the incident, assessing risks, using crisis intervention 
techniques,  communicating  and  coordinating  a  response,  and  utilizing  available  resources  (such  as 
personnel, equipment; usage of time, distance, and cover). 

6.  CRISIS  INTERVENTION  TECHNIQUES  (CIT)  -  A  collaborative  approach  to  safely  and 
effectively address the needs of people with mental  illnesses, link them to appropriate services, 
and  divert  them  from  the  criminal  justice  system  if  appropriate.  The  primary  goal  of  CIT  is  to 
improve  officer  and  mental  health  consumer  safety  while  reducing  injuries  to  officers  and 
consumers  during  law  enforcement  contacts.  Crisis intervention techniques include using distance, 
time, verbal tactics, or other tactics to de-escalate a situation. 

7.  LEVELS OF RESISTANCE DEFINITIONS 

a.  COMPLIANT - Subject offers no resistance. 
b.  PASSIVE NON-COMPLIANCE - Does not respond to verbal commands but also offers no physical 

form of resistance. 

c.  ACTIVE  RESISTANCE  -  Physically  evasive  movements  to  defeat  an  officer’s  attempt  at  control 
including  bracing,  tensing,  running  away,  verbally  or  physically  signaling  an  intention  to  avoid  or 
prevent being taken into or retained in custody.  

d.  ASSAULTIVE  -  Aggressive  or  combative;  attempting  to  assault  the  officer  or  another  person, 

verbally or physically displays an intention to assault the officer or another person.  

e.  LIFE-THREATENING  -  Any  action  likely  to  result  in  serious  bodily  injury  or  death  of  the  officer  or 

another person. 

8.  FORCE DEFINITIONS 

a.  REASONABLE  FORCE  -  An  objective  standard  of  force  viewed  from  the  perspective  of  a 
reasonable  officer,  without  the  benefit  of  20/20  hindsight,  and  based  on  the  totality  of  the 
circumstances  known  to,  or  perceived  by,  the  officer  at  the  time.  (See  Section  Z-1,  GRAHAM  V. 
CONNOR) 

b.  REPORTABLE USE OF FORCE - Any use of force (UOF) that causes injury as defined below; any 
UOF whether or not it results in injury, involving the discharge of a firearm, a canine bite, or use of 
an impact weapon, chemical agent, carotid restraint control hold, or CED; and any UOF, whether or 
not it results in injury, that deviates from the techniques taught and the equipment provided by the 
Department (see in section B.5.). 

c.  LESS  LETHAL  FORCE-  Any  force,  agent,  or  device  that  is  not  reasonably  likely  to  cause  death.  
Less lethal force options include, but are not limited to, the use of the CED, baton, chemical agents, 
40mm projectiles, bean bag shotgun rounds, carotid restraint control hold, personal body weapons, 
and control holds. 

d.  DEADLY FORCE - Any force that poses a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily injury 
is  considered  deadly  force.    Deadly  force  may  include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  the  discharge  of  a 
firearm, an intentional strike to the head with an impact weapon or an impromptu impact weapon. 

9.  INJURY DEFINITIONS 

a.  INJURY - Any visible bodily injury or complaint of bodily injury (non-visible injury). The injury must 
be reasonably related to the use of force applied. Injury, as defined in this order, does not include 
the temporary pain associated with the proper application of control holds and/or restraints. 

b.  SERIOUS BODILY INJURY - A serious impairment of physical condition, including but not limited to 
loss of consciousness, protracted loss or impairment of function of any bodily member or organ, a 
wound requiring extensive suturing, and serious disfigurement.   
 

B.  GENERAL 

1.  All applications of force whether deadly or less lethal are governed by this policy. 

GO 580.02 
Page 2 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

2.  Force shall be used in compliance with Penal Code Section 835a, which states “Any peace officer who 
has  reasonable  cause  to  believe  that  the  person  to  be  arrested  has  committed  a  public  offense  may 
use reasonable force to effect the arrest, to prevent escape or to overcome resistance. A peace officer 
who  makes  or  attempts  to  make  an  arrest  need  not  retreat  or  desist  from  his  efforts  because  of  the 
resistance or threatened resistance of the person being arrested; nor shall such officer be deemed an 
aggressor  or  lose  his  right  to  self-defense  by  the  use  of  reasonable  force  to  effect  the  arrest  or  to 
prevent escape or to overcome resistance.” 

3.  An  officer  may  use  deadly  force  if,  under  the  circumstances,  the  officer  reasonably  believes  that  the 
suspect poses an imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury, either to the officer or to others. 
4.  When  using  force,  an  officer  should  use  techniques  and  equipment  that  are  approved  by  the 

department.  

5.  Circumstances  may  arise  in  which  an  officer  reasonably  believes  that  it  would  be  impractical  or 
ineffective  to  use  any  of  the  tools,  weapons  or  methods  provided  by  the  Department.  An  officer  may 
find it more effective or reasonable to improvise their response to rapidly unfolding conditions that they 
are confronting. In such circumstances, the officer may resort to using reasonable means of force.  The 
use  of  any  improvised  device  or  method  must  nonetheless  be  reasonable  and  utilized  only  to  the 
degree that reasonably appears necessary to accomplish a legitimate law enforcement purpose. 

6.  When  feasible  under  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  and  where  it  may  be  accomplished  without 

increasing the risk of harm to officers or others, officers should attempt to de-escalate situations 

7.  When  an  officer  believes  they  are  dealing  with  a  mentally  ill,  developmentally  disabled,  or  an 
emotionally  disturbed  individual,  the  officer  shall,  if  time  and  circumstances  reasonably  permit,  utilize 
Crisis Intervention Techniques.   

8.  An officer shall not use deadly force against a person who presents only a danger to themselves and 

does not pose an imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury to another person or officer. 

9.  If feasible, and if doing so would not increase the danger to the officer or others, the officer shall give a 

verbal warning to submit to the authority of the officer before using force. 

10. Refer  to  GO  522.02  Emergency  Care  for  Individuals  Under  Police  Care  or  Control  when  rendering 

emergency medical treatment or summoning medical assistance. 
 

C.  CONSIDERATIONS GOVERNING ALL REASONABLE USE OF FORCE 

1.  Any peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a 
public  offense  may  use  reasonable  force  to  effect  the  arrest,  to  prevent  escape  or  to  overcome 
resistance. 

2.  A peace officer who makes or attempts to make an arrest need not retreat or desist from his efforts by 
reason of the resistance or threatened resistance of the person being arrested; nor shall such officer be 
deemed an aggressor or lose his right to self-defense by the use of reasonable force to effect the arrest 
or to prevent escape or to overcome resistance. 

3.  The factors used to determine reasonableness shall be consistent with Graham v. Connor (1989) 490 
U.S.  386.    The  decision  by  a  peace  officer  to  use force  shall  be  evaluated  from  the  perspective  of  a 
reasonable  officer  in  the  same  situation,  based  on  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  known  to  or 
perceived by the officer at the time, rather than with the benefit of hindsight, and that the totality of the 
circumstances shall account for occasions when officers may be forced to make quick judgments about 
using force. 

4.  In determining the appropriate level of force, officers shall evaluate each situation in light of facts and 

circumstances of each particular case. Those factors may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  The severity of the crime 
b.  The level of threat or resistance presented by the subject 
c.  Whether the subject was posing an imminent threat to officers or a danger to the community 
d.  The potential for injury to citizens, officers or subjects 
e.  The risk or apparent attempt by the subject to escape 

GO 580.02 
Page 3 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

f.  The conduct of the subject being confronted (as reasonably perceived by the officer at the time) 
g.  The amount of time and any changing circumstances during which the officer had to determine the 

type and amount of force that appeared to be reasonable 

h.  The availability of other resources 
i.  The training and experience of the officer 
j.  The proximity or access of weapons to the subject 
k.  Officer versus subject factors such as age, size, relative strength, skill level, injury/exhaustion and 

number officers versus subjects; and 

l.  The environmental factors and/or other exigent circumstances. 
m.  Not all of the above factors may be present or relevant in a particular situation, and there may be 

additional factors not listed. 

5.  Law  enforcement  officers  are  authorized  to  use  deadly  force  level  of  force  under  the  following 

circumstances: 
a.  To protect themselves or others from what is reasonably believed to be an imminent threat of death 

or serious bodily injury; or, 

b.  To  prevent  a  crime  where  the  suspect's  actions  are  reasonably  believed  to  place  person(s)  in 

imminent jeopardy of death or serious bodily injury; or, 

c.  To  prevent  the  escape  of  a  fleeing  suspect  when  the  officer  reasonably  believes  the  escape  will 
pose a significant threat of death or serious bodily injury to the officer or others if apprehension is 
delayed.   

 

D.  PROHIBITED USES OF FORCE 
1.  Officers shall not use force: 

public or another person. 

a.  Against  individuals  who  are  not  subject  to  arrest  or  detention,  except  to  protect  the  officer,  the 

b.  Against  individuals  who  are  handcuffed  or  otherwise  restrained,  except  where  the  individual  is 
actively  resisting,  attempting  escape,  or  poses  an  imminent  threat  to  the  officers,  the  public,  or 
themselves. 

c.  Against individuals for the sole purpose of preventing the exercise of first amendment rights, when 

a legitimate law enforcement purpose does not exist. 

d.  To punish or to retaliate. 
e.  To stop a subject from swallowing a substance that is already in their mouth. 

 
E.  FORCE OPTIONS 

1.  Officers have a variety of force options available to them.  Officers do not need to follow a continuum of 
force, but shall select the use of force they deem appropriate for the circumstances, ensuring their use 
of force complies with the  law,  the  provisions  of this  order  and the  any  specific  department  orders  or 
manuals governing the type of force they select to use.  Officers shall continue to assess their use of 
force  selection  and either transition  to  a  different  use  of force  or  discontinue a use  of force based on 
their assessment, ensuring their use of force remains reasonable for the circumstances.   

2.  The following is a list of use of force options.  This is not a complete list of options: 

a.  Carotid Restraint Control Hold  
b.  Chemical Agents  
c.  Conductive Energy Devices (CED)  
d.  Control Holds  
e.  Discharge of Firearms and Other Deadly Force  
f. 
Impact projectiles 
g.  Impact weapons 
h.  Personal Body Weapons  
i.  Pointing of a Firearm at a person 

GO 580.02 
Page 4 of 17 
 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

 

 

j.  Takedowns 
k.  Use of Canine 
l.  Verbal Commands/Instructions/Command Presence 

3.  The following is a list of department orders and manuals covering specific use of force topics: 

a.  Arrest of Passive Resisters Manual; RM 532.09 
b.  Baton Manual; RM 580.08 
c.  Carotid Restraint Control Hold Manual; RM 580.09 
d.  Chemical Agents Manual; RM 580.07 
e.  Crowd and Riot Control Manual; RM 532.11 
f.  Less Lethal Weapons General Order; GO 580.12 
g.  Search and Handcuff Manual; RM 523.02 
h.  Use of Canine General Order; GO 580.14  
i.  Use of a Conductive Energy Device (CED) General Order; GO 580.10 

 

F.  USE OF A CONDUCTIVE ENERGY DEVICE (CED) 

1.  An officer may deploy and use the CED under the following circumstances: 

a.  To  incapacitate  a  subject  whose  conduct  rises  at  least  to  the  level  of  active  resistance  and  is  an 
imminent  threat  to  the  officer  or  others.    This  includes  threats  or  pre-indicators  leading  up  to 
assaultive or resistive behavior. 

b.  To  incapacitate  a  suicidal  subject  who  can’t  be  safely  controlled  through  crisis  intervention 

techniques or other force options. 

2.  Officers shall avoid using the CED for more than a total of three (3) five-second cycles (15 seconds), 
unless  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  are  such  that  a  reasonable  officer  would  conclude  that  each 
subsequent  application  of  the  CED,  analyzed  separately,  is  warranted  by  the  imminent  threat  to  the 
officer or others.  

3.  CED deployment shall cease when the subject no longer represents an imminent threat to the officer or 

4.  The  use  of the  CED  is  considered  a  serious  use  of force.    Each  individual  cycle of  the  CED must  be 

another person. 

reasonable under the circumstances. 

5.  The  CED  should  not  be  used  on  handcuffed  persons  unless  they  are  actively  resisting  or 
exhibiting active aggression and/or to prevent individuals from harming themselves or others.  

6.  The CED shall be used in accordance with SPD General Order 580.10 

 

 

G.  POINTING A FIREARM 

1.  Nothing  in  this  policy  shall  preclude  an  officer  from  drawing  of  a  firearm  when  the  officer  reasonably 

believes it necessary for the safety of the officer or another. 

2.  Detentions  involving  the  pointing  of  a  firearm  at  a  person  shall  be  entered  in  accordance  with  SPD 

General Order 210.09 (RIPA). 

3.  The pointing of a firearm at a person shall be documented in the appropriate report or on the CAD call. 

H.  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER DEADLY FORCE 

1.  The  use  of  a  firearm  or  other  deadly  force  is  the  most  serious  decision  an  officer  may  make.    In 
determining  whether  deadly  force  is  necessary,  officers  shall  evaluate  each  situation  considering  the 
circumstances of each case and shall use other available resources and techniques if reasonably safe 
and feasible to a reasonable officer. 

2.  An officer may discharge a firearm in the performance of their official duty 

a.  To protect themselves or others from what is reasonably believed to be an imminent threat of death 

or serious bodily injury. 

b.  To  prevent  a  crime  where  the  suspect's  actions  are  reasonably  believed  to  place  person(s)  in 

imminent jeopardy of death or serious bodily injury. 

GO 580.02 
Page 5 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

c.  To  effect  an  arrest,  prevent  an  escape,  or  recapture  an  escapee  when  the  officer  reasonably 
believes the suspect to be arrested poses an imminent threat to cause death or serious bodily injury 
if apprehension is delayed. 

d.  To  stop  a  dangerous  animal  that  poses  an  imminent  risk  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  to  a 

person. 

e.  At a firing range, pursuant to all safety rules and regulations. 

3.  Firearms shall not be discharged as a warning. 
4.  If feasible, and if doing so would not increase the danger to the officer or others, the officer should give 

5.  If feasible, an officer shall take reasonable care when discharging their firearm so as not to jeopardize 

a verbal warning prior to using deadly force. 

the safety of another officer or another person. 

6.  The  decision  by  a  peace  officer  to  use  deadly  force  shall  be  evaluated  from  the  perspective  of  an 
reasonable  officer  in  the  same  situation,  based  on  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  known  to  or 
perceived by the officer at the time, rather than with the benefit of hindsight, and that the totality of the 
circumstances shall account for occasions when officers may be forced to make quick judgments about 
using force. 

7.  When an employee discharges or attempts to discharge a firearm while on or off duty, intentionally or 
accidentally,  the  employee  shall  immediately  notify  the  on-duty  watch  commander.  This  does  not 
include  intentional  discharges  at  a  range  or  for  recreational  purposes  (e.g.,  hunting,  private  target 
practice, or other similar activities). 

8.  Officers shall comply with GO 522.02 (Emergency Care for Individuals Under Police Care or Control). 

 

I.  MOVING VEHICLES 

1.  An officer shall make every reasonable effort to move out of the path of an approaching vehicle instead 

of discharging their firearms at the vehicle or its occupants. 

2.  An officer shall make every reasonable effort to not intentionally place themselves in a position where a 

vehicle could be perceived as a threat to the officer. 

3.  Officers  shall  not  discharge  a  firearm  at  or  from  a  moving  vehicle  unless  one  of  the  following 

circumstances exists: 
a.  Deadly  force,  or  the  imminent  threat  of  deadly  force,  is  being  used  against  an  officer  or  another 

person by means other than the moving vehicle. 

b.  The  driver  is  using  or  is  attempting to  use the  vehicle as a  means to cause  injury  or  death  to the 

officer or another person. 

c.  When the  driver  of  a  vehicle continues to  present  an  ongoing  imminent threat  of  death  or  serious 
bodily  injury  to  officers  or  another  person  and  deadly  force  is feasible to preserve  the  lives  of the 
officer or another person. 

4.  In  reviewing  incidents  involving  the  discharging  of  a  firearm  from  a  moving  vehicle  or  at  a  moving 
vehicle,  the  Department will  consider  the  totality  of the  circumstances,  including  but  not  limited to the 
whether  the  officer  or  another  person  were  in  imminent  danger  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  and 
whether the officers present employed tactics consistent with the Department’s use of force principles 
and approved training. 

 

J.  CAROTID RESTRAINT CONTROL HOLD 

1.  The Carotid Restraint Control Hold offers officers a method for controlling individuals when other force 

options would be inappropriate, not feasible or ineffective under the circumstances.  The purpose of the 
carotid restraint control hold is to subdue the individual to the point they can be safely controlled and 
taken into custody.  The successful use of the Carotid Restraint Control Hold is meant to prevent the 
officer from escalating to deadly force. 

2.  The use of the Carotid Restraint Control Hold may be used when: 

a.  The officer has been trained on the proper use and application of the technique. 

GO 580.02 
Page 6 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

b.  In compliance with the Carotid Restraint Control Hold Manual (RM#580.09). 
c.  An individual is assaultive, and the officer reasonably believes that such a hold appears necessary 

to prevent serious bodily injury or death to an officer or other person. 
 

K.  MANDATORY REPORTING PROCEDURE 

1.  Reporting Uses of Force 

a.  Employees shall notify the field supervisor anytime they use a reportable use of force.  A reportable 

use of force is any use of force where any of the following apply: 
(1)  The use of force involves: 

(a)  The discharge of a firearm 
(b)  A canine bite 
(c)  The use of an impact weapon 
(d)  The use of a chemical agent 
(e)  The use of the Carotid Restraint Control Hold 
(f)  The use of a CED 
(g)  Or  any  use  of  force  as  outlined  in  Appendix  #1  with  the  corresponding  reporting 

requirements in Appendix #2 (refer to Appendix #1 and #2 at end of policy). 

(2)  The  use  of  force  deviates  from  the  techniques  taught  or  the  equipment  provided  by  the 

Department (see in section B.5.).  

(3)  The use of force causes injury. 

(a)  For  the  purpose  of  determining  if  a  use  of  force  is  reportable,  an  injury  is  defined  as  any 
visible  bodily  injury  or  complaint  of  bodily  injury  (non-visible  injury).  The  injury  must  be 
reasonably  related  to  the  use  of  force  applied.  The  temporary  pain  associated  with  the 
proper  application  of  control  holds  and/or  restraints  is  not  an  injury  for  purposes  of 
determining if a use of force is reportable. 

b.  If an officer is in doubt as to whether a use of force is reportable, the officer shall notify their field 

supervisor, who will then be responsible for making the determination. 

c.  After notifying the field supervisor: 

(1)  The officer shall complete the applicable report(s) (crime, casualty, and/or incident). The report 
shall include a complete description of how and why force was used, as well as a description of 
injuries that the suspect received or claims to have received. 

(2)  An officer booking an arrested subject shall notify the appropriate jail medical staff employee of 

the injury and type of force used. 

(3)  The  officer  shall  forward  through  the  chain  of  command  to  the  to  the  Professional  Standards 
Unit  (PSU)  a  competed  City  of  Sacramento  General  Liability  Loss  Report  Non-vehicular  (RM 
Red Border Form).  

d.  When the  use  of force  has  resulted  in an  injury, an  officer  shall  comply with the  provisions  in GO 
522.02 Emergency Care for Individuals under Police Care or Control. If the individual is not arrested 
or  will  be  released  with  a  citation,  an  officer  should  offer  to  call  for  an  ambulance  or  assist  in 
arranging transportation to an authorized medical facility. 

e.  Whether or not a use of force is reportable under this policy, any use of force used to overcome a 
combative, physically aggressive, or fleeing subject who has delayed, obstructed, or fought with an 
officer  shall  be  documented  in  a  crime,  casualty,  or  incident  report.  The  officer’s  field  supervisor 
shall be notified. Brief resistance to the application of departmentally approved control holds does 
not require a report. 

2.  Excessive Force 

a.  An officer shall intercede when present and observing another officer using force that is clearly 

beyond that which is necessary, as determined by an reasonable officer under the circumstances, 
taking into account the possibility that other officers may have additional information regarding the 
threat posed by a subject. 

GO 580.02 
Page 7 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

b.  Officers shall report potential excessive force to a superior officer and/or Internal Affairs when 

present and observing another officer using force that the officer believes to be beyond that which is 
necessary, as determined by an reasonable officer under the circumstances based upon the totality 
of information actually known to the officer. 

3.  Supervisors’ Responsibilities 

a.  Upon notification of a reportable use of force, the officer’s field supervisor shall: 

b.  Management Level Review 

(1)  Respond  to  the  location  of  the  arrest  to  ensure  that  a  thorough  investigation  takes  place.  A 
thorough  investigation  into  a  use  of force  by  an officer should include, but is not limited to, an 
area  canvass  (for  witnesses,  evidence  and  surveillance  video),  witness  statements  (which 
should  be  obtained  by  a  supervisor  or  officers  not  involved  in  the  use  of  force),  suspect 
statements,  and  photographs  of  the  scene  and  any  injuries.  If  the  supervisor  is  unable  to 
respond to the location of the arrest, the supervisor shall note the reasons why on the call. 

(2)  Review the incident with the arresting officer and/or other officers. 
(3)  Review all recordings (both audio and video) of the event, including In-Car Camera, Body Worn 

Camera video, and any available surveillance video). 

(4)  Assess the appropriateness of the use of force and any charge(s) against the suspect. 
(5)  Consider arranging for other officers to transport and book the suspect in the event the suspect 
continues  to  display  hostile,  confrontational,  or  oppositional  behavior  toward  the  arresting 
officer(s). 

(1)  The  officer’s  field  supervisor  shall  initiate  a  management  level  review  by  making  an  entry  into 
the Department’s use of force tracking software whenever the following reportable use of force 
events occur: 
(a)  Any reportable use of force that results in the suspect requiring a medical clearance (Fit for 
Incarceration report) prior to booking or, if the suspect is not booked into jail or juvenile hall, 
any injury that would likely require a Fit for Incarceration report. 

(b)  Any reportable use of force, involving the discharge of a firearm, a canine bite, or the use of 

an impact weapon, chemical agent, carotid restraint control hold, or CED. 

(c)  Any  reportable  use  of  force  that  deviates  from  the  techniques  taught  or  the  equipment 

(d)  Any  use  of  force  the  supervisor  or  watch  commander  determines  should  be  subject  to  a 

provided by the Department. 

management level review. 

(2)  The  field  supervisor  shall  immediately  notify  the  watch  commander  upon  determining  that  a 

management level review is required. 

(3)  The field supervisor shall enter the following information into the tracking software: 

(a)  List of officers involved. 
(b)  The type of force that was used. 
(c)  The extent of injuries (if any) to the officer and the suspect. 
(d)  Whether or not the supervisor responded to the scene and if not, why. 
(e)  Any administrative actions taken by the supervisor or other personnel. 
(f)  The  supervisor's  opinion  as  to  whether  the  use  of  force  was  consistent  with  department 

policy. 

(g)  All pertinent documents shall be attached to the entry. 

(4)  Tracking software entries should be completed within 30 days of the incident date.  
(5)  In cases where a firearm has been discharged or the use of force results in death, the tracking 
software entry shall be completed by IA/PSU and shall not be completed by the field supervisor. 
(6)  If  the  use  of  force  was  captured  on  non-departmental  video,  a  copy  of  the  video  shall  be 

(7)  All  uses  of  force  shall  be  categorized  using  the  level  of  force  definitions  as  outlined  by  RIPA.  

forwarded to PSU. 

See Appendix #1. 

GO 580.02 
Page 8 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

(8)  The watch commander shall review with the field supervisor any uses of force that are subject to 
management level review. If, after the review, the watch commander determines that the use of 
force was inconsistent with department policy, the watch commander shall contact the officer’s 
captain  and  review  the  incident.  If  necessary,  the  captain  will  refer  the  incident  to  Internal 
Affairs. 

(9)  Use of force deployed by supervisors 

(a)  In  the  event  a  sergeant  uses  force  or  gives  an  officer  a  direct  order  to  deploy  force  that 
triggers  the  reporting  requirements  set  forth  in  this  order,  the  watch  commander  will  be 
responsible for identifying the person responsible for complying with this section. 

(b)  In  the  event  a  manager  uses  force  or  gives  an  officer  a  direct  order  to  deploy  force  that 
triggers the reporting requirements set forth in this order, the manager shall notify their direct 
superior  and  the  superior  shall  be  responsible  for  identifying  the  person  responsible  for 
complying with this section. 
 

L.  OFFICER INVOLVED SHOOTING RESPONSE AND INVESTIGATION 

1.  Duties of the Initial On-Scene Supervisor 
In any officer-involved shooting incident, the initial on-scene supervisor or district sergeant shall:  

a.  Respond  immediately,  take  charge,  and  ensure  the  watch  commander  has  been  notified  of  the 

b.  Stabilize  the  situation  and  establish  protection  of  the  crime  scene.  All  personnel  desiring  to  gain 

access to the scene shall be referred to the crime scene recorder. 

c.  Obtain a brief overview of the situation. 

(1)  The  supervisor  shall  attempt  to  gain  an  overview  of  the  situation  by  contacting  non-shooting 

incident.   

officer(s).  

(2)  If  the  supervisor  is  unable  to  gain  an  overview  of  the  situation  from  non-shooting  officers,  the 
supervisor  shall  obtain  a  public  safety  statement  from  at  least  one  shooting  officer.  The  on-
scene  supervisor  shall  ensure  shooting  officers  are  only  contacted  once  and  that  additional 
supervisors do not repeat the request for a public safety statement. 

(3)  Public safety statements are conducted using SPD Card 136. The supervisor will ask the series 
of  preliminary  questions  contained  on  SPD  Card  136.  While  these  questions  are  intended  to 
cover most situations, they may not fit every incident. Supervisors may deviate slightly from the 
questions to match the facts of the incident but should be careful to limit their questions to only 
obtaining information needed for a public safety statement. The SPD Card 136 questions are: 
(a)  What was your approximate location(s) when you discharged your firearm? 
(b)  What was the approximate number of rounds you fired and in what direction? 
(c)  Do you know if any other officers fired any rounds? 
(d)  Is it possible the suspect(s) fired rounds at you? If so, from what direction? 
(e)  Are you aware of any victims/witnesses/injured people? If so, what is their location? 
(f)  Are there any outstanding suspect(s)? If so, what is their description, direction and mode of 

travel? Are there weapons involved? 

(g)  Are there any weapons/evidence that need to be secured? If so, what is their location? 
(4)  If an officer declines to give a public safety statement the supervisor may administratively order 
any SPD officer to immediately provide limited public safety information necessary to secure the 
scene,  locate  witnesses/evidence,  request  additional  resources  and  pursue  outstanding 
suspect(s).  If  the  shooting  involves  officers  from  an  outside  agency  involved  within  city  limits, 
the  supervisor  will  have  to  coordinate  obtaining  the  above  information  with  a  supervisor  from 
that outside agency. 

d.  After obtaining a public safety statement, administratively order each involved officer not to discuss 
the  incident  with other  officers  until they  receive further  direction from  a supervisor  and to  turn  off 
their body-worn cameras. 

GO 580.02 
Page 9 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

e.  Physically  collect  the  body-worn  cameras  from  all  involved  officers  and  place  them  into  separate 
envelopes to start the chain of custody. This camera(s) will later be turned over to investigators for 
downloading of their contents. 

f.  Separate involved officer(s), assign a Peer Support Officer to each officer, and coordinate with the 

watch commander to move the officer(s) to an off-site staging area. 

g.  Remain on-scene to brief arriving investigators and be there to answer any questions as they may 

arise. 

h.  After turning the scene over to the Homicide Sergeant, the supervisor shall prepare a supplemental 
report,  memorializing  the  Public  Safety  Statement(s)  and  other  actions  taken  at  the  scene for  the 
General Offense (GO). 

i.  Give  consideration  toward  GO  570.03  (Post-Trauma  Response)  and  offer  the  employee(s)  peer 

support as outlined in GO 570.04 (Peer Support Program). 

2.  Officer Involved Shooting Investigation 

a.  Care  should  be  taken  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  any  physical  evidence  present  on  the  involved 
officer(s)  and  the  officer(s)’  equipment  and/or  clothing  (e.g.  blood,  fingerprints,  etc.)  until 
investigators or Forensic Investigators (FI) can properly retrieve it. 

b.  Evidence collection shall minimally consist of: 

(1)  Retrieving and booking any expended cartridges, bullets, and shotgun casings or pellets, along 

with all live ammunition pertinent to the incident. 

(2)  Diagramming of the crime scene, including positions of persons and objects and the trajectories 

(3)  Producing adequate pictorial sketches and photographs, including the use of a video camera if 

(4)  Obtaining  a  recording  of  all  radio  transmissions  within  ten  (10)  days  or  as  soon  as  they  are 

of expended shots. 

necessary, of damaged property. 

available. 

(5)  Obtaining copies of the officer(s)’ firearm training records. 
(6)  Determining factors  of  probable  cause,  if  present,  that  contributed  to  the  officer(s)’  decision  in 

discharging a weapon. 

(7)  Ensuring all items of evidence related to the shooting are collected and booked. 
(8)  Noting  the  condition  of  city  equipment  that  may  be  associated  with  the  weapon  discharge. 
Removing from service for later inspection all such equipment that could remotely be attributed 
to or may have been damaged, For example: 
(a)  If  a  weapon  discharged  due  to  being  caught  on  the  officer's  gun  belt  or  clothing,  book  all 

(b)  If the discharge was the result of a vehicle door closing on an officer with the weapon drawn, 

such articles. 

remove the vehicle from service. 

c.  Obtain statements from all persons present. 
d.  Have the area canvassed for witnesses and obtain statements. 
e.  Involved  officers  shall  not  review  any  video  at  the  scene  without  supervisor  approval  except  for 
exigent  public  safety  reasons  (e.g.,  providing  suspect  description,  suspect’s  direction  of  travel, 
vehicle description, weapon type etc.). 

3.  Watch Level Investigation Following an Officer Involved Shooting 

a.  The following shooting incidents shall be investigated at the watch level: 

(1)  Shooting of an animal. 
(2)  Accidental discharge without injury. 
(3)  Unsuccessful attempted discharge (e.g., weapon malfunction). 

b.  The on-duty watch commander shall: 

(1)  Initiate  an  administrative  investigation  involving  the  discharge  of  firearms,  except  accidental 
discharges  at  the  range.  The  investigation  shall  be  documented  in  a  memorandum  and  sent 

GO 580.02 
Page 10 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

through the chain of command to the appropriate office chief. The report shall then be forwarded 
to the Professional Standards Unit (PSU), where the report shall be kept on file. 

c. 

(2)  Designate a sergeant as the principal investigating supervisor. 
If,  in  the  watch  commander’s  opinion,  a  more  thorough  investigation  is  necessary,  a  homicide 
callout may be initiated. 

4.  Homicide Unit Responsibilities Following an Officer Involved Shooting 

a.  The Homicide Unit shall investigate the following shooting incidents: 

(1)  Intentional discharge at a person. 
(2)  Discharge resulting in injury to a person. 

b.  After  the  scene  has been  stabilized  and imminent threats  of  hostility  neutralized,  command of  the 

scene shall be relinquished to the Homicide Unit supervisor. 

c.  Homicide  detectives  shall  be  aware  that  any  shooting  may  have  a  traumatic  effect  upon  involved 
and  uninvolved  officers.  Detectives  shall  conduct  their  investigation  in  a  professional  manner  that 
shall not add unnecessary trauma to the situation. 

d.  The  Office  of  Investigations  Captain  or  designee  shall  contact  the  Coroner’s  Office  as  soon  as 
practical in an attempt to identify and notify the next of kin of any subject who dies in our custody or 
who is killed by police action.  

e.  The Office of Investigations Captain or designee shall identify an investigative sergeant to serve as 
an information liaison between the deceased subject’s next of kin and the Department. Investigative 
updates shall be provided to the next of kin as needed or requested.      

f.  District Attorney’s Office (DA) and Office of Public Safety Accountability (OPSA) Notification 

(1)  The  DA  and  OPSA  or  their  designees  shall  be  notified  to  respond  to  all  officer-involved 

shootings that result in injury to another person. 

(2)  The  DA  and  OPSA  shall  be  permitted  access  to  the  incident  scene  to  the  extent  possible 
without contaminating evidence or otherwise disturbing the scene. Their presence is to merely 
observe and familiarize themselves with the situation.   

(3)  The  DA  shall  conduct  an  independent  assessment  of  the  circumstances  and  will  issue  written 

findings.  

5.  Surrender/Inspection of Weapons Following an Officer Involved Shooting 

a.  An officer shall be allowed to retain a handgun while at the scene. Firearms other than the involved 
officer(s)’ handgun (e.g., shotguns, rifles, etc.) that have been discharged shall be secured by the 
watch commander after the situation has been stabilized. An officer may be required to surrender 
their handguns at the scene if a replacement weapon is immediately available. If this occurs, it shall 
be accomplished in a private area outside the view of the public or the media. 

b.  The  officer(s)’  weapon(s)  shall  be  inspected  by  an  investigator  who  is  familiar  with  the  weapon 

system used, and documented as follows:  
(1)  The magazine shall be removed. 
(2)  The chamber shall be checked and cleared, and its condition noted. 
(3)  All  live  rounds  shall  be  counted,  or  the  cylinder  be  opened,  and  the  number  and  location  of 

spent and live rounds described and diagrammed (if necessary). 

(4)  The serial number shall be recorded. 
(5)  The weapon shall then be reloaded and returned to the officer or booked at the discretion of the 

investigator. 

c.  On an accidental discharge, the weapon shall be booked and referred to the armorer for inspection. 
d.  The  officer's  supervisor  shall  ensure  that  a  replacement  weapon  is  issued  in  a  timely  manner. 
Replacement  weapons  shall  minimally  be  kept  available  at  all  substations  and  in  the  Detective 
Division.  

e.  Any other weapon at the scene may be inspected by the investigating officers at their discretion. 

6.  Transportation from the Scene 

GO 580.02 
Page 11 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

a.  As  soon  as  is  practical,  the  involved  officer(s)  shall  be  transported  from  the  scene  to  an  offsite 
staging area, usually the nearest department facility.  The officer(s) shall be kept secure from public 
confrontations (GO 570.04). 

b.  Peer Support members shall not remove the involved officer(s) from the scene without approval of 

the Incident Commander (IC). 

c.  An officer being transported to a police facility in a marked unit shall not be placed in the rear seat 
unless  under  arrest.  An  officer  may  be  transported  from  the  scene  by  their  SPOA  representative 
and/or their attorney when appropriate. 

7.  Reports 

a.  Every officer shall prepare a written report of their activity and observations as soon as reasonably 
practical unless an oral statement is taken from detectives.  Officers who complete oral interviews 
are not be required to prepare a written report. 

b.  An  officer  may  be  directed  to  prepare  reports  at  the  Detective  Division  at  the  discretion  of  the 

investigating supervisor or higher authority. 
Injured officers are exempt from preparing a report until physically capable. 

c. 
d.  Reports  shall  be  submitted  and  approved  prior  to  end  of  watch  unless  circumstances  make  the 

completion of a report unreasonable as determined by an appropriate supervisor. 

e.  Outside agency personnel may use their own report forms. Copies of the reports may serve as SPD 

supplements. 

f.  An officer shall not be advised of their Miranda rights unless: 

(1)  Under arrest. 
(2)  Information  available  to  the  investigator(s)  causes  them  to  believe  the  officer  is  criminally 

responsible. 

(3)  The officer makes incriminating statements during an oral interview. 

g.  While an officer(s) is providing a voluntary oral interview for statement under Miranda, the following 

personnel may view the process: 
(1)  Assigned  detectives,  supervisors, 

representative, DA investigator, OPSA representative, and/or the officer's legal representative. 
(2)  Except with the expressed authorization of the ranking detective or supervisor, no others shall 

Internal  Affairs  Division 

(IAD) 

investigator,  PSU 

h.  When an oral  interview  is  conducted,  it  shall  be audio recorded  if  possible. The  officer(s)  shall  be 

be allowed to view the interview. 

informed that the interview is being recorded. 

j. 

i.  No more than two (2) detectives shall be in the interview room with an officer. An officer may have 
representation  present  during  any  interview.  The  representative  shall  not  obstruct  or  otherwise 
interfere with the investigative process. However, the representative may invoke Miranda to protect 
the officer from self-incrimination.  
Involved officer(s) and their representatives will have access to their In-Car Camera and Body-Worn 
Camera  recordings  and/or  other  reasonably  available  recordings  of  the  incident  that  depicts  the 
involved officer or the perspective of the involved officer at the time of the incident. However, if such 
a  recording  also  contains  significant  content  outside  these  parameters,  the  Chief  of  Police,  or 
designee, may redact or withhold the portions of the video containing the content. The officer and 
their  representative  shall  be  notified  of  any  redactions  or  withholdings.  An  officer  shall  be 
encouraged  to  recall  the  circumstances  and  provide  a  chronological  outline  of  the  incident.  The 
officer(s) shall have the opportunity to talk to an SPOA representative or attorney prior to giving an 
oral or written statement. 

k.  The interviewing detective shall be sensitive to the physical needs and emotional well-being of the 

officer. When appropriate, food and drink shall be provided. The detective shall: 
(1)  Ensure that the officer is able to move about the office without confronting suspects, witnesses, 

or the media. 

GO 580.02 
Page 12 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

(2)  Ask the officer(s) if they wish to talk with the police chaplain and/or a Peer Support member (GO 

570.04). 

l.  An officer who is an eyewitness to a shooting shall: 

(1)  Respond to the Detective Division to complete a written report or oral interview.  
(2)  Be directed to an available desk away from other officers or distractions. 
(3)  Proceed with the preparation of a written report or make notes for the oral interview. 
m.  If applicable, the investigating supervisor shall complete or shall ensure the completion of: 
(1)  An After-Action Report (SPD 005) per GO 532.13 (After Action/Debriefing Reports). 
(2)  City of Sacramento Liability Loss Report Form RM-3 (red border) per GO 240.03 (Civil Liability). 

8.  Shooting by SPD Officers Outside City Jurisdiction 

a.  Whenever an officer, by discharge of a firearm, causes a death or injury outside the city jurisdiction, 
the  officer  shall  notify  the  agency  having  jurisdiction  and  the  SPD  watch  commander,  who  shall 
ensure IAD is notified and assigned to assist the agency conducting the investigation for purposes 
of coordination and keeping informed of the investigation. 

b.  If the agency having jurisdiction does not have the resources available to conduct the investigation 
and requests the SPD conduct the investigation, the watch commander shall be notified. The watch 
commander shall assess whether our Department will conduct the investigation.   

9.  Shooting by Officers of Another Law Enforcement Agency Within City Jurisdiction 

a.  If death or injury is the result of a police shooting by another law enforcement agency, the Homicide 
Unit shall be notified to handle the investigation. The other agency shall be notified immediately so 
they may monitor the investigation [GO 560.01 (Arrest and Investigation by Allied Agencies)]. 

10. Refresher Training 

Any officer involved in an accidental or intentional firearms discharge shall undergo firearms refresher 
training prior to returning to full duty. Refresher training: 
a.  Shall be in accordance with the module prepared by the Training Section. 
b.  May include topics such as officer safety tactics, policy, and the law. 
c.  Shall be conducted by an authorized range master who shall direct a memorandum to the Captain, 
Personnel  Service  Division  (PSD),  or  designee,  indicating  that  the  officer  has  received  firearm 
refresher training. 

d.  Shall  be  documented  and  submitted  to  the  PSD  to  be  placed  in  the  officer's  personnel  file  and  a 

copy forwarded to PSU to be placed in the Department’s critical incident file. 

11. Return to Duty 

Return to duty for each employee involved in a fatal or injury shooting shall only occur after: 
a.  Consideration has been given to GO 570.03 (Post Trauma Response). 
b.  The COP, or designee, has notified the City Manager. 

 

M.  REVIEW PROCEDURES 

1.  Internal Affairs Division  

a.  The IAD commander shall direct IAD investigators or PSU representatives to respond as needed. 
b.  If an involved officer has elected to not provide criminal investigators with a voluntary statement, the 
assigned  IAD  investigator  shall  conduct  an  administrative  interview  to  determine  all  relevant 
information. 

2.  Professional Standards Unit  

PSU shall: 
a.  Have  access  to  all  reports  and  investigative  materials  regarding  any  officer  shooting  incident  with 

the exception of IAD investigative files. 

b.  Keep and maintain reports and related material indefinitely. 
c.  Contact  the  City  of  Sacramento  Risk  Manager  by  the  next  business  day  to  discuss  any  potential 

civil liability issues. 

d.  Schedule and facilitate a preliminary review. 

GO 580.02 
Page 13 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

e.  Submit annual URSUS reporting to the Department of Justice. 
f.  Collect statistics in Blue Team of the use of force incidents. 
g.  Conduct annual review of this policy. 
h.  Maintain the Early Intervention Program (EIP). 
i.  Prepare an annual analysis report on the use of force incidents. The report should be submitted to 

the Chief of Police. The report should include: 
(1)  The identification of any trends in the use of force by members. 
(2)  Training needs recommendations. 
(3)  Equipment needs recommendations. 
(4)  Policy revision recommendations. 

j.  Prepare  a  memorandum  to  the  involved  officer(s)  advising  them  of  any  in  policy  shooting  review 

disposition. 
3.  Administrative Review 

a.  Officer  involved  shootings,  other  uses  of  force  resulting  in  death,  in  custody  deaths  and  other 
significant events at the discretion of the Chief of Police shall be reviewed via the following two-step 
process: 
(1)  Preliminary Review  

(a)  This  review  shall  take  place  within  the  first  30  days  following  the  incident.  Extensions 

beyond the 30-day deadline must be approved by the Chief of Police. 

(b)  The Preliminary Review is intended to be a high-level analysis of the incident evaluating our 

organizational performance. This review should be facilitated by the Area Captain. 

(c)  If the incident involved a use of force, the policy issues related to the specific application of 

force during the event shall not be addressed. 

(d)  Areas  covered  should  include  an  overview  of  facts,  initial  response,  training,  equipment, 
policy  considerations  other  than  the  specific  application  of  force  and  internal  and  external 
communication.  

(e)  The  Captain  of  the  Office  of  the  Chief  shall  prepare  and  submit  a memo  documenting  the 

findings of the Preliminary Review to PSU. 

(2)  Final Policy Review 

(a)  An  administrative  review  to  determine  if  the  force  used  during  the  incident  complied  with 

Department policy. 

(b)  Takes place after the District Attorney has rendered an opinion on the use of force. 
(c)  Shall be chaired by the Deputy Chief, Office of Investigations, and minimally consist of: 

1)  Captain(s) of the involved employee(s) 
2)  Lieutenant, Training Division 
3)  Watch Commander 
4)  Department Range Master 
 
5)  PSU 
6)  Risk Management 
7)  Office of Public Safety Accountability Director 
8)  SPOA President 

 

 

(d)  Sworn  managers  attending  the  Final  Policy  Review  shall  recommend  to  the  COP  whether 

the specific use of force was within department policy. 

(e)  The  investigating  Watch  Commander  or  Homicide  Sergeant  shall  be  prepared  to  fully 

explain the investigation during the Final Policy Review. 

(f)  The  Homicide  Sergeant  shall  ensure  that  a  copy  of  the  District  Attorney’s  review  letter  is 

forwarded to PSU for proper filing and distribution to the involved employee(s). 

(g)  The  Captain  of  the  Office  of  the  Chief  shall  prepare  and  submit  a memo  documenting  the 

findings of the Final Policy Review to PSU. 
 

GO 580.02 
Page 14 of 17 
 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

 

 
N.  TRAINING  

updates. 

1.  All officers shall receive training, at least annually, on this agency’s use of force policy and related legal 

2.  In addition, training shall be provided on a regular and periodic basis and designed to  
a.  Provide techniques for the use of, and reinforces the importance of, de-escalation. 
b.  Simulate actual shooting situations and conditions.  
c.  Enhance  an  officer’s  discretion  and judgment  in  using  less  lethal  and  deadly  force  in  accordance 

with this policy. 

3.  All use of force training shall be documented. 

 

O.  CASE LAW REFERENCES 

1.  GRAHAM V. CONNOR (1989) 490 U.S.386 is a legal standard which defines what reasonable force is. 
The court’s decision “requires careful attention to the facts and circumstances of each particular case, 
including the severity of the crime at issue, whether the suspect poses an imminent threat to the safety 
of  the  officer  or  others,  and  whether  he  is  actively  resisting  arrest  or  attempting  to  evade  arrest  by 
flight.”  In  addition,  “the  ‘reasonableness’  of  a  particular  use  of  force  must  be  judged  from  the 
perspective of a reasonable officer on scene, rather than with 20/20 vision of hindsight... the question is 
whether  the  officers’  actions  are  ‘objectively  reasonable’  in  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances 
confronting them.” 

2.  TENNESSEE  V.  GARNER    471  U.S.  1  (1985),[2]  is  a  civil  case  in  which  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States  held  that,  under  the  Fourth  Amendment,  when  a  law  enforcement  officer  is  pursuing  a 
fleeing suspect, the officer may not use deadly force to prevent escape unless "the officer has probable 
cause  to  believe  that  the  suspect  poses  a  significant  threat  of  death  or  serious  physical  injury  to  the 
officer or others." It was found that use of deadly force to prevent escape is an unreasonable seizure 
under  the  Fourth  Amendment,  in  the  absence  of  probable  cause  that  the  fleeing  suspect  posed  a 
physical danger. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

GO 580.02 
Page 15 of 17 
 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

LEVEL 1 

LEVEL 2 

LEVEL 3 

•  UOF resulting in death  
•  UOF resulting in Serious Bodily Injury (SBI) 
•  Officer involved shooting resulting in injury or 

death  

•  Officer involved shooting-suspect missed 
•  Use of vehicle as weapon resulting in SBI 
• 

In-custody death 
Use of non-issued equipment resulting in Serious 
Bodily Injury or death 

 

•  Any UOF used to overcome a 

combative, physically aggressive, or 
fleeing subject who has delayed, 
obstructed, or fought with an officer 
•  Any use of force that results in a visible 

injury or complaint of pain by the subject 
to whom force was applied to. Example: 
visible scratch, abrasion, complaint of 
pain however not minor discomfort by 
application of certain control holds or 
handcuffs 

•  Officer involved shooting of an 

animal 
•  Canine bite 
•  Use of carotid restraint control hold   
•  Use of control holds resulting in SBI 
•  CED deployment-probe 
•  CS gas 
•  Use of baton   
•  Use of CED drive stun 
•  Use of OC spray 
•  Use of personal body weapons 
•  Use of 40 MM impound sponge 

•  Use of 40 MM direct impact OC 

•  Use of flexible baton rounds (bean 

(Blue Tip) 

(Orange Tip) 

bag) 

•  Use of pepper ball (live-x-round) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

GO 580.02 
Page 16 of 17 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
GENERAL ORDERS 

 

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR LEVEL 1 

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR LEVEL 3 

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR 
LEVEL 2 

•  Sergeant notification 
•  Crime or casualty report 
•  CSI request  
•  Red border form 
•  Blue team entry  
•  Watch commander investigation 
(shooting of an animal or use of 
carotid restraint control hold) 

 

•  Sergeant notification 
• 
Incident/crime report 
•  CSI request 
•  Red border if there is visible injury 
•  No Blue Team Entry 

 

•  Sergeant notification 
•  Homicide call out  
•  CSI request 
• 
IAD call out 
•  PSU call out 
•  PIO call out 
•  District Attorney response team 
•  OPSA 
•  Crime or casualty report 
•  Red border form 
•  Blue team entry 
 
All call outs are based on the needs of the incident. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

GO 580.02 
Page 17 of 17 
 

