ST. PETERSBURG POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
 
GENERAL ORDER 
 
 
 
 
 

 

*DATE OF 
ISSUE 

April 2013 

EFFECTIVE DATE 

NUMBER 

Immediately 

II-42 

Distribution:  All Employees 

USE OF FORCE 

Vehicular Force 
Weapons Use 

Use of Firearms 
Use of Force 

Force Guidelines 
Force, Use of 

Discharge of Firearms 
Firearms 

Subject: 
 
 
Index as: 
 
 
 
Accreditation Standards: 
Cross Reference: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Replaces: 
 
 
 
All employees shall be issued a copy of General Order II-42, Use of Force. Prior to being permitted  to carry any 
weapon  or  assigned  any  duties  which  require  the  possession  of  a  weapon,  officers  shall  be  instructed  about 
state law and the policies of this agency regarding the use of force and the use of authorized weapons 
 
This Order consists of the following sections: 
 

1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.3.3, 1.3.4, 1.3.5, 1.3.6, 1.3.7, 1.3.8, 1.3.9, 1.3.10, 1.3.11, 1.3.12, 1.3.13, 33.4.1 
G.O. III-15, High Risk Situations 
G.O. III-17, Pursuits  
G.O. III-18, Civil Disturbances 
G.O. II-20, Weapons Qualifications 
I.O. V.5:1, Persons Suffering from Mental Illness 
I.O. V.5:20, Critical Incident Stress Debriefing 
§394.463(d), §776.012, .05, .06, §790.01, .052, .053, 174 and §943.10(6), F.S.S. 
G.O. II-42, Use of Force (April 25, 2013) 
Chief Interim Change Memo 13-109 (December 17, 2013) 

I.  Policy 
II.  Definitions 
III.  Legal Considerations 
IV.  Authorized Use of Force 
V.  Unauthorized Use of Force 
VI.  Medical Response 
VII. Investigating  and  Reporting  the  Use  of  Force 

Not Involving a Firearm  

VIII. Use of Force Reports 

 
I.  POLICY 
 

A. 

in  order 

to  achieve  a  specific 

It  is  recognized  that  officers  may  encounter 
situations where force may be necessary to overcome 
resistance 
law 
enforcement objective. The force applied by an officer 
in any situation may range from verbal direction to the 
use  of  deadly  force,  if  confronted  with  a  situation 
where  the  officer  or  some  other  person  is  threatened 
with serious physical injury or death. 
 

B. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Police 
Department that the use of force in any situation shall 
be  limited  to  the  force  which  is  needed  to  halt 

aggressive  actions  and/or 
to  overcome  specific 
resistance  by  the  subject  in  order  to  accomplish  a 
lawful objective. 
 

C.  It is also the policy of the St. Petersburg Police 
Department 
that  officers  shall  exhaust  all  other 
reasonable  means  of  apprehension,  or  defense  of 
themselves  or  another,  before  resorting  to  the  use  of 
deadly force. 
 

D.  The Department recognizes that bullets do not 
immobilize  moving  motor  vehicles. 
Incapacitating 
drivers of motor vehicles does not eliminate the threat 
or danger posed by the moving motor vehicle. 
 

E.  The possession and/or handling of firearms by 
employees of this Department are a regular part of the 
duties of a police officer and a small number of civilian 
employees;  i.e., the  armorer, forensic technicians and 
property  clerks.  Firearms  are  inherently  dangerous 
devices which require extra caution to ensure they are 
is  strictly 
handled  safely,  and  access 
controlled. 
 

them 

to 

F. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Police 
Department  that  all  firearms  owned  by,  or  in  the 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

1 

(11/01/2014) 

possession of, employees of this Department shall be 
handled  safely  and  be  properly  secured  when  not  in 
use. 

 

G.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Police 
Department  that  employees  shall  report  the  loss  or 
theft of all firearms, owned by  or in  the  possession  of 
the employee. 
 

firearms;  however, 

 
H.  Officers  are  expected  to  comply  with  all  the 
provisions  of  this  Order  regarding  the  carrying  or 
employment  of  off-duty 
those 
choosing to exercise any rights provided to them under 
federal or state law, not in accord with this policy, may 
be  considered  as  acting  outside  the  scope  of  their 
employment. 
 
II.  DEFINITIONS 
 

A.  ASP  -  An  impact  weapon  manufactured  by 

Armament Systems and Procedures, Inc. 
 

B.  Active  Resistance 

-  A  subject’s  use  of 
physically  evasive  movements  directed  toward  the 
officer  such  as  bracing,  pushing,  or  pulling  to  prevent 
the officer from establishing control over the subject. 
 

C.  Aggressive  Resistance  -  A  subject’s  attacking 
movements  toward  an  officer  that  may  cause  injury, 
but  are  not  likely  to  cause  death  or  serious  physical 
injury to the officer or others. 
 

D.  Aerosol  Subject  Restraint 
pressurized chemical spray; e.g., OC spray. 
 

(ASR) 

-  A 

E.  Certified  Reserve  Officer  -  A  part-time  law 
enforcement  officer  employed  or  appointed  less  than 
full  time,  as  defined  by  an  employing  agency,  with  or 
without  compensation,  who  is  vested  with  authority  to 
bear  arms  and  to  make  arrests  and  whose  primary 
responsibility  is  the  prevention  and  detection  of  crime 
or  the  enforcement  of  the  penal,  criminal,  traffic,  or 
highway laws of the state [§943.10(6), F.S.S.]. 
 

F.  Compliance  -  The  verbal  and/or  physical 
yielding to an officer’s authority without apparent threat 
of resistance or violence. 
 

G.  Deadly  Force  -  Intentional  discharge  of  an 
authorized  firearm  at  an  individual,  intentional  contact 
or  attempted  contact  by  the  use  of  an  employee’s 
motor vehicle (except as outlined in G.O.  II-2), or any 
other  force  which  is  likely  to  cause  death  or  serious 
physical injury. 
 

H.  Deadly Force Resistance - A subject’s hostile, 
attacking  movements,  with  or  without  a  weapon,  that 
create  a  reasonable  perception  by  the  officer  that  the 

General Order II-42 

subject  intends  to  cause,  and  has  the  capability  of 
causing, death or serious  physical  injury to the officer 
or others. 
 

I.  De-escalation - Decreasing the use of force or 

J.  Disengagement - Discontinuing a command or 

K.  Escalation  -  Increasing  the  use  of  force  or 

resistance. 
 

physical use of force. 
 

resistance. 
 

 

L.  Fire For Effect - Shoot for center of mass. 

M.  Force  Guidelines  -  A  framework  for  making 
decisions involving reasonable use of force by officers. 
The  structure  of  the  Force  Guidelines  is  based  on 
constitutional  considerations  and  case 
law  and 
describes  appropriate  decision-making  in  a  fluid  and 
dynamic  situation.  The  Force  Guidelines  consider  the 
totality  of  circumstances  to  include  the  relationship 
between 
resistance,  all 
reasonably  perceived  factors  that  may  have  an  effect 
on the situation, and the response options available to 
the officer. (See Figure 1.) 
 

the  subject’s 

form  of 

N.  Injury - A complaint of injury, whether visible or 

not. 
 

O.  Less  Lethal  Force  -  Force  that  is  not  likely  to 

cause death or serious physical injury. 
 

P.  Non-Deadly  Force  -  Force  which  is  neither 
likely  nor  intended  to  cause  death  or  serious  physical 
injury. 
 

Q.  Objective  Reasonableness  -  The  process  for 
evaluating the appropriateness of an officer’s response 
to a subject’s resistance. 
 

R.  Officer  -  A  sworn  employee  of 

the  St. 
Petersburg Police Department, who is a certified police 
officer  by  the  State  of  Florida  and  serves  in  that 
capacity, including certified reserve officers. 
 

S.  Passive Resistance - A subject’s verbal and/or 
physical  refusal  to  comply  with  an  officer’s  lawful 
direction,  causing 
to  use  physical 
the  officer 
techniques to establish control. 
 

-  Used 

T.  Physical  Control 

in  achieving 
compliance  or  custody  through  the  use  of  empty-
handed  or  leverage-enhanced  techniques,  such  as 
restraint  devices, 
transporters, 
pain  compliance, 
takedowns, and striking techniques. 
 

U.  Serious  Physical  Injury  -  A  bodily  injury  that 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

2 

(11/01/2014) 

General Order II-42 

creates  a  substantial  risk  of  death,  causes  serious  or 
permanent disfigurement, or results in a long-term loss 
or impairment of the functioning of any body extremity 
or organ. 
 

V.  Totality  of  Circumstances  -  All  facts  and 
circumstances  known  to  the  officer  at  the  time  or 
reasonably perceived by the officer as the basis for the 
use of force decision. 
 

-  A 

there 

felony 

involving 

W.  Violent  Felony 

the 
commission  of  a  violent  act,  or  when 
is 
reasonable  cause  to  believe  that  serious  physical 
injury or death might be inflicted upon another person. 
 
 
(Continued on next page) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

3 

(11/01/2014) 

General Order II-42 

Force Guidelines 
The Decision Making Process 
_______________________________________________________ 
 
The  Force  Guidelines  recognize  that  officers  make  use  of  force 
decisions  based  on  the  totality  of  circumstances  at  the  time  of  the 
incident.  Circumstances  are  fluid  and  dynamic.  Formulating  a  valid 
response requires continual assessment as the situation changes. 

Subject Resistance 

 
Is  the  subject  verbally  or  physically 
resisting my lawful authority? 
 
Is 
the  subject  making  attacking 
movements  that  are  not  likely  to 
cause death or great bodily harm? 
 
Is 
the  subject  making  attacking 
movements  that  are  likely  to  cause 
death or great bodily harm? 

Situational Factors 

 
What  subject  factors  influence  this 
decision?  Weapon?  Physical  size? 
Demeanor? Others? 
 
factors 
What  officer 
situation? 
Training? 
Physical size? Others? 
 
What  environmental  factors  influence 
this  situation?  Weather?  Location? 
Presence of others? 

this 
Experience? 

influence 

Justification 

 
Were  my  actions  reasonable  based 
on  the  subject’s  resistance  and  the 
totality of the circumstances? 
 
Am  I  able  to  articulate  the  reasons 
for my actions? 
 
compliance  with 
Was 
constitutional and state laws, agency 
policy, and training? 

in 

I 

Figure 1 
 

 

Officer’s Response 

 
Can I physically control the subject? 
 
Could  I  use  a  non-lethal  weapon  not 
meant  to  cause  death  or  great  bodily 
harm? 
 
Is  deadly  force  the  appropriate  option 
to  prevent  death  or  great  bodily  harm 
to myself or others? 

 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

4 

(11/01/2014) 

III.  LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 

A.  Florida  Law  provides  that  a  law  enforcement 
officer,  or  any  person  whom  they  have  summoned  or 
directed  to  assist,  need  not  retreat  or  desist  from 
efforts to make a lawful arrest because of resistance or 
threatened  resistance  to  the  arrest.  The  officer  is 
justified in the use of any force which they reasonably 
believe  to  be  necessary  to  defend  themselves  or 
another from bodily harm while making the arrest. 
 

B.  Florida law also provides that: 

 

 

 

1.  The  subject  must  know,  or  have  a 
reasonable belief, the person employing force is a law 
law 
enforcement  officer  or  someone  assisting  a 
enforcement officer; 
 

2.  The arrest must be lawful; and 

3.  The  employment  of  force  beyond  that 
which  is  necessary  to  control  and  apprehend  the 
subject  is  unlawful,  and  subjects  the  Department  and 
the officer to civil and/or criminal liability. 
 
IV.  AUTHORIZED USE OF FORCE 
 

A.  Deadly Force 

1.  Deadly force is force that is likely to cause 
death  or  serious  physical  injury.  Use  of  deadly  force 
may be an officer’s first and only appropriate response 
force  does  not 
threat.  Deadly 
to  a  perceived 
necessarily  mean  that  someone  died  from  the  force 
used.  The  deadly  force  can  cause  serious  physical 
injury or no harm at all. Deadly force is only permitted 
when  other  reasonable  means  to  avoid  danger  have 
failed,  or  are  impractical,  and  the  officer  reasonably 
believes that deadly force is immediately necessary to 
defend  oneself  or  another  from  imminent  danger  of 
death or serious physical injury. 
 

2.  Officers shall not draw or display a firearm 

except for official use as provided for in this Order. 
 

3.  Officers shall never draw a firearm unless 

they reasonably anticipate a need to use it. 
 

4.  Officers shall not  draw their firearm solely 
for  the  purpose  of  utilizing  the  firearm  mounted 
flashlight,  unless  the  circumstances  would  otherwise 
justify the use of the firearm. 
 

5.  Officers  may  discharge  a 

in 
connection  with  the  performance  of  official  police 
duties, for the following reasons: 

firearm 

a.  For  target  practice  at  a  range,  when 
authorized  for  training  purposes,  or  at  an  organized 

General Order II-42 

match. 

b.  To  kill  a  seriously 

injured  or 
dangerous  animal  if  it  poses  an  imminent  threat  of 
death  or  great  bodily  harm  to  a  person,  when  other 
means are impractical and then only with authorization 
from a supervisor, if time permits. 

the  danger  have 

c.  When  other  reasonable  means 

to 
the  officer 
avoid 
reasonably  believes 
immediately 
necessary to defend oneself or another from death or 
serious physical injury. 

failed,  and 
is 

this  action 

d.  To  apprehend  a  fleeing  felon  ONLY 

when: 

1)  Other 

reasonable  means  of 

apprehension have failed; and 

2)  Some  warning,  if  feasible,  has 

been given; and 

3)  The  officer  reasonably  believes 
that  the  person  fleeing  has  committed  a  VIOLENT 
FELONY involving the use or threatened use of deadly 
force,  and  the  officer  reasonably  believes  that  the 
fleeing  felon  poses  an  immediate  threat  of  death  or 
serious physical injury to the officer or another. 
 

6.  When necessary, the firearm shall be fired 
for effect. Unless under fire by an assailant, the officer 
will  ascertain  the  target  before  discharging  their 
firearm.   The  officer  shall  cease  firing  when  it  is 
reasonably believed the threat no longer exists. 
 

7.  The firearm shall not be fired to wound or 

to warn. 
 

 

B.  Non-deadly Force 

1.  Non-deadly 
circumstances dictate; however: 

force  may  be  applied 

if 

a.  Officers  will  attempt  to  gain  voluntary 
compliance through the use of verbal techniques, prior 
to employing physical force. 

b.  When required, officers shall use only 
objective reasonable force that is necessary to control 
the  situation,  based  on 
the 
circumstances known to the officer at the time 
 

totality  of 

the 

2.  Less 

the 
lethal  weapons 
Department  may  be  employed  when  their  use  is 
dictated  by 
resistance 
encountered, and force is being used: 

level  of  physical 

issued  by 

the 

a.  To  halt  or  prevent  use  of  force  by 
another person upon themselves or another person, or 
b.  To deter an attack by an animal upon 

themselves or another person. 
 

3.  Articles  or  implements  not  designed  as  a 
weapon,  nor 
the 
for 
Department,  shall  not  be  utilized  as  a  weapon  unless 
no  reasonable  alternative  exists,  and  the  action  is 

this  purpose  by 

issued 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

5 

(11/01/2014) 

clearly  required  to  protect  the  officer  or  another  from 
death or serious physical injury. 
 

C.  Officers confronted by a person armed with an 
ASR  should  attempt  to  place  themselves  beyond  the 
effective  range  of  the  ASR.  The  mere  possession  by 
another  of  an  ASR  does  not  in  itself  create  an 
imminent  threat  of  serious  physical  injury;  however, 
officers must consider the  intentions and the ability  of 
the  subject  to  employ  the  ASR  and  the  appropriate 
degree of force required to gain control of the situation. 
 

D.  Upon the lowering or elimination of resistance 
by the subject, officers shall similarly reduce their use 
of force while maintaining control of the subject. 
 
V.  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF FORCE 
 

A.  Warning  Shots  -  Officer(s)  shall  not  fire  into 
the air or ground in an attempt to deter or halt a fleeing 
criminal. Therefore, no warning shots are permitted. 
 

B.  Firing at or from Vehicles 

1.  Officers  approaching  vehicles  should  do 
so  from  a  safe  direction  and  provide  themselves  an 
opportunity to move to an area of safety, if necessary. 
 

2.  When approaching a vehicle, officers shall 
use  appropriate  safety  measures  and  shall  not  place 
themselves  in  harm’s  way  by  standing  or  moving  in 
front of a vehicle, standing directly behind, or reaching 
inside an operating vehicle. 
 

3.  Officers  shall  not  fire  at  a  moving  vehicle 
or any occupant of a moving vehicle. The officer’s use 
of  deadly  force  may  be  justified  if  the  occupant  of  a 
moving  vehicle  poses  an  immediate  threat  with  a 
firearm or fires upon an officer or another, and all other 
reasonable means to avoid the danger have failed. 
 

4.  Officers  shall  not  fire  from  a  moving 

vehicle. 
 

C.  Officers  shall  not,  at  any  time,  obstruct  the 
breathing or carotid blood flow of a person by applying 
any pressure, obstruction or chokehold. 
 

D.  Officers  shall  utilize  all  less-lethal  weapons 
and  firearms  in  the  manner  consistent  with  their 
training.  Examples  of  prohibited  use  include,  but  are 
not limited to: 
 

1.  Head strikes with an impact weapon. 

2.  The ASP being used as a choking device. 

 

 

 
 

General Order II-42 

E.  An  officer  shall  not  kick  or  use  a  leg  strike  of 
any kind on anyone who is lying in a prone position or 
who has been placed in a position of disadvantage. 
 

F.  Officers  shall  not  employ  any  weapon  not 
authorized by the Department or any weapon for which 
they have not received training and demonstrated their 
proficiency. 
 

G.  Officers shall not employ strikes to the face or 
head  as  a  preemptive  measure  to  control  a  suspect. 
Strikes  to  the  face  or  head  shall  only  be  used  as  a 
defensive  measure  with  a  combative  suspect  and  not 
as  a  technique  to  gain  control  of  a  non-combative 
suspect. 
 
VI.  MEDICAL RESPONSE 
 

A.  Officers  shall  ensure  first  aid  is  promptly 
provided  to  individuals  affected  by  the  use  of  force,  if 
necessary,  when the situation is  no  longer a  threat to 
the officer or any other person. 
 

B.  Emergency  medical  personnel  shall  be 
summoned,  if  necessary.  Persons  in  custody  shall  be 
accompanied to the hospital as described in GO III-10, 
Transporting and Booking Prisoners. 
 

C.  Aerosol Subject Restraints (ASR) 

 

1.  Special attention is required to monitor the 
well-being  of  persons  who  have  been  exposed  to  an 
ASR. 

a.  Any  person  exposed  to  an  ASR  who 
experiences  or  complains  of  symptoms  other  than 
those normally associated  with the use  of an ASR, or 
does not show signs of recovery in the expected time, 
shall be provided immediate medical attention. 

include 
b.  Unusual  symptoms  may 
unconsciousness,  profuse  sweating,  chest  pain  or 
slow, shallow breathing. 

c.  The results of ASR exposure may last 
approximately  30-45  minutes.  Medical  treatment  is 
usually not required. 

d.  Persons  who  have  been  sprayed  and 
who are restrained should be carefully monitored, and 
they  shall  be  verbally  reassured  the  ASR  effects 
should subside in approximately 45 minutes. 

e. 

If  the  person  no  longer  is  a  threat  to 
the officers, the natural  decontamination process may 
be aided by water or wind/air movement. 

f.  Persons  who  may  have  been 
accidentally  exposed  to  an  ASR  shall  be  afforded 
assistance until they have recovered. 
 

2.  Officers  transporting  a  prisoner  to  the 
Detention  Center  shall  advise  the  intake  officer  if  the 
subject has been sprayed with an ASR. 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

6 

(11/01/2014) 

2. 

If  the  incident  results  in  a  death,  the 

following persons shall also be notified: 

less lethal weapons; or  
 

VII. INVESTIGATING  AND  REPORTING  THE  USE 
OF FORCE NOT INVOLVING A FIREARM 
 

A.  Officers  shall  notify  a  supervisor  whenever  a 
less-lethal  weapon 
the  course  of 
is  used 
apprehension,  self-defense,  or  whenever  anyone  has 
force.  The 
been 
supervisor  shall  determine 
further 
for 
notifications. 
 

the  application  of 
the  need 

injured  by 

in 

B.  Whenever there has been injury or death of a 
person(s), or whenever any person is to be admitted to 
a hospital, or if death results from the use of force: 
 

1.  The  Watch  Commander  shall  ensure  the 

following persons are immediately notified: 

a.  The  Chief  of  Police  via  the  involved 

officer’s chain of command, 

b.  Office  of  Professional  Standards 

Commander, 

Manager, 

Commander, 

c.  Community 

Awareness 

Division 

d.  Crimes  Against  Persons  Division 

e.  EAP Coordinator 

 

 

a.  State Attorney's Office, and 
b.  Medical Examiner. 

3.  The Office of Professional Standards shall 
conduct  an  investigation  and  forward  their  completed 
report to the Chief of Police as soon as possible. 
 

4.  The Crimes Against Persons Division shall 
conduct an investigation in cases of injury or death, or 
as directed by the Chief of Police. 
 

C.  Whenever  any  person  is  hospitalized  for  a 
serious  injury  or  death  results  due  to  the  use  of  force 
by an officer: 
 

1.  The District Major, or their designee, shall 
reassign  the  officer  to  inside  duty  or  place  the  officer 
the  Department’s 
leave  until 
on  administrative 
investigation has been completed. 
 

the 
2.  The  officer  shall  be  afforded 
opportunity  to  use  the  services  of  any  component  of 
the  Employee  Assistance  Program  which  may  be 
available.  
 

D.  An  officer  who  uses  force  with  a  less-lethal 
weapon  while  off  duty  shall  make  a  report  to  the 
Communications  Center  as  soon  as  circumstances 
permit. 
 

General Order II-42 

1.  Communications  shall  notify  the  Watch 
Commander  who  will  determine  if  an  immediate 
internal investigation is necessary. 
 

2. 

In addition to verbally reporting the use of 
force, the officer shall complete a Use of Force Report 
and submit it to their supervisor as soon as possible. 
 

E.  All accidental and intentional discharges of an 

ASR shall be reported on a Use of Force Report. 
 
VIII.  
 

USE OF FORCE REPORTS 

A.  An  officer  using  physical  control  or  deadly 
force as defined in this Order shall complete and file a 
Use of Force Report, prior to going off duty, whenever 
an employee: 
 

firearm 

for  other 

than 

1.  Discharges  a 
training or recreational purposes; 
 

2.  Takes  an  action  that  results  in,  or  is 
alleged  to  have  resulted  in,  injury  or  death  of  another 
person; 
 

3.  Applies  force  through  the  use  of  lethal  or 

4.  Applies  weaponless  physical  force  at  a 

level as defined by the agency. 
 

B. 

If  the  officer  is  unable  to  complete  the  Use  of 
Force  Report,  the  immediate  supervisor  shall  prepare 
the report based on available information. 
 

C.  The  entire  (three  part)  Use  of  Force  Report, 
along  with  a  copy  of  the  police  report,  shall  be 
administratively  reviewed  by  the  officer’s  chain  of 
command. 
 

D.  Following the administrative review, the entire 
(three part) Use of Force Report, along with a copy of 
the  police  report,  shall  be  sent  to  the  Office  of 
Professional Standards. 
 

1.  The  Office  of  Professional  Standards  will 
send  the  original  to  the  Records  and  Identification 
Division, the  yellow copy to the Training Division, and 
retain the pink copy. 
 

2.  The  supervisor  approving 

the  original 
police  report  will  ensure  a  copy  of  the  report  is 
attached  to  the  Use  of  Force  Report  being  routed  to 
the Office of Professional Standards. 
 
 
 
 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

7 

(11/01/2014) 

General Order II-42 

E.  The  Use  of  Force  Report  is  a  synopsis  of  the 
incident  for  statistical  purposes  and  is  in  addition  to 
any reports required by K:\Research\GeneralOrders\III 
Operational 
Incident 
Reports.pdf. 
 

Orders\III-23 

General 

F.  The Use of Force Report shall be used by the: 

 

1.  Training Division 

a.  To  monitor  use  of  force  techniques 
and tactics, to determine effectiveness of intermediate 
weapons, and to identify training needs. 

b.  To  conduct  a  documented  annual 
analysis of reports required by this Order for the Chief 
of Police. 
 

3.  The Office of Professional Standards 

a.  To  alert  the  Department  of  potential 

complaints of excessive force. 

b.  To  monitor  use  of  force  incidents  in 
order  to  identify  officers  who  may  be  in  need  of 
additional  training  in  the  use  of  force  and  the  policies 
of the Department. 

c.  To  prepare  the  Office  of  Professional 

Standards Annual Report for the Chief of Police. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Anthony Holloway 
Chief of Police 

Revisions or additions are highlighted 

8 

(11/01/2014) 

