 

 

Atlanta Police Department 
Policy Manual 

 
 

Effective Date 
October 30, 2013 

 

 

Standard Operating 
Procedure 
 

APD.SOP.3010  
Use of Force 

Applicable To:  All sworn employees 

Approval Authority:  Chief George N. Turner 

 

 

Signature:  Signed by GNT 

Date Signed:   10/28/2013 

PURPOSE 

ACTION 

POLICY 

Table of Content
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
 
1. 
 

RESPONSIBILITIES 

Use of Force Generally 
Use of Deadly Force 
Medical Attention Required 
Lethal and Less Lethal Weapons 

PURPOSE 

 

 

4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
5. 
6. 
7. 

1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 

Reporting Requirements 
Chain of Command Review 
Maintenance of Use of Force Reports 
Analysis of Use of Force Reports 

DEFINITIONS 

CANCELLATIONS 

REFERENCES 

4 
5 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 

The purpose of this directive is to establish the policy and procedure governing the use of force 
by employees of the Atlanta Police Department. 
 
POLICY 

The Atlanta Police Department recognizes and respects the value of human life and the right of 
people to be secure in their persons and property. Sworn employees, who in the performance of 
their duties, encounter situations where the use of force reasonably appears necessary to affect 
an arrest or detention, overcome resistance, control a subject, or protect themselves or others 
from injury or death will only use that force which is reasonable and necessary in order to 
accomplish lawful objectives. 

This policy and procedure is for the Atlanta Police Department’s use only. The policies and 
procedures contained herein do not apply in any criminal or civil proceedings. If departmental 
policies and procedures are more stringent than legal standards as it concerns criminal or civil 
liability, they will not be construed as creating a higher legal standard of safety to care by which 
an employee is to be bound in an evidentiary sense with respect to claims by others involving 
criminal or civil liability. The violation of this policy and procedure will subject employees to 
departmental administrative disciplinary action only and cannot form the basis for any civil and/or 
criminal action. 

RESPONSIBILITIES 

Division, section, and unit commanders are responsible for ensuring that all employees within 
their chain of command comply with the requirements of this directive.  

Supervisors are responsible for ensuring compliance with this directive and submitting the 
required use of force documentation to the Central Records Unit.  

2. 
 
2.1 

 
2.2 

 
3. 
 
3.1 

 
3.2  

Form APD-700, revised 2/04 

  

3.3 
 
3.4 
 
3.5 

 
3.6 

 
4. 
 
4.1 

 
4.1.1 

 
4.1.2 

 
4.1.3 

 
4.1.4 

 
4.1.5 

 
4.1.6 

 
4.1.7 

 
4.1.8 

 
 

ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL 

 
 

APD.SOP.3010 
Use of Force 

 

 

 
All employees are responsible for complying with the requirements of this directive.  

The Central Records Unit will be the central repository for Use of Force reports. 

The Training Section will review all use of force reports and also maintain records of the 
issuance of the department’s use of force policy to employees. 

The Office of Professional Standards (OPS) will investigate suspected employee work rule 
violations arising out of an employee’s use of force in accordance with APD.SOP.2020 
“Disciplinary Process.” 

ACTION  

Use of Force Generally 
(CALEA 5th ed. Standard 1.3.1; 1.3.3; 1.3.8) 

Employees are expressly prohibited from the unnecessary or unreasonable use of force against 
any person or property. 

Employees will only use that force which is reasonable and necessary to affect an arrest, prevent 
an escape, necessarily restrict the movement of a prisoner, defend the officer or another from 
physical assault, or to accomplish other lawful objectives.  

Employees will only use city-issued and/or authorized lethal and less lethal weapons and 
ammunition. These weapons will be used in a manner consistent with established federal and 
state guidelines governing the use of force. (O.C.G.A 16-3-21) 

In emergency situations or under exigent circumstances where it is immediately necessary to 
use force to prevent serious bodily injury or death, and city-issued and/or authorized lethal or 
less lethal weapons are inoperable, inaccessible, or otherwise not available or effective, 
employees may use any object or weaponless control techniques available.  

Employees whose use of force results in death or serious physical injury will be placed on Force 
Usage Review Assignment. (See APD.SOP.2020 “Disciplinary Process”) 

Warning shots, or the discharging of a firearm to caution or deter a specified and undesirable 
course of action, are prohibited due to the potential for harm.  

Employees will not use neck restraints, carotid artery holds, or other weaponless control 
techniques that are not taught or approved by the department due to the potential for serious 
injury or death; unless they are in an emergency situation or under exigent circumstances where 
it is immediately necessary to use force to prevent serious bodily injury or death and city-issued 
and/or authorized lethal or less lethal weapons are inoperable, inaccessible, or otherwise not 
available or effective.  

All department sworn personnel who carry less lethal or lethal weapons are required to receive 
annual in-service training on the department’s use of force policies.  The annual in-service 
training on the department’s use of force policies must be documented and the curriculum shall 
cover weaponless control techniques. (State Law Enforcement Certification Program, 5th Edition 
standards, 1.14; and CALEA 5th edition, standard 1.3.11) 

Page 2 of 7 

   

4.2 

4.3 

4.3.1 

 
4.3.2 

4.3.3 

  
4.4 

4.4.1 

 
4.4.2 

 
4.4.3 

 

ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL 

APD.SOP.3010 
Use of Force 

 
 

 

 

 

Use of Deadly Force 
(CALEA 5th ed. Standard 1.3.2) 
 
An employee may use deadly force to apprehend a suspected felon only when:  
 
1.  He or she reasonably believes that the suspect possesses a deadly weapon or any object, 
device, or instrument which, when used offensively against a person, is likely to or actually 
does result in serious bodily injury and when he or she reasonably believes that the suspect 
poses an immediate threat of serious bodily injury to the officer or others; or 

 
2.  When there is probable cause to believe that the suspect has committed a crime involving 

the infliction or threatened infliction of serious physical harm (O.C.G.A. Section 17-4-20) and 
the employee reasonably believes that the suspect’s escape would create a continuing 
danger of serious physical harm to any person.  

 
Medical Attention Required 
(CALEA 5th ed. Standard 1.3.5) 
 
Employees will make appropriate medical aid and/or assistance available to all persons who 
have a physical injury or when injury is likely to have occurred due to an employee’s use of force.  

Medical aid and/or assistance will be provided in a timely manner or as soon as practical without 
further endangering the employee or others.  

In officers’ ICIS incident report, they shall write in detail the requested medical aid and/or 
assistance available to all persons who have sustained a physical injury occurring as a result of 
an employee’s use of force. (APD. SOP.3060 “Reports and Report Writing”) 

Lethal and Less Lethal Weapons 
(CALEA 5th ed. Standards 1.3.4; 1.3.9 through 1.3.12) 
 
Employees will only be allowed to carry and use city issued and/or authorized lethal and less 
lethal weapons after demonstrating proficiency in their use; including, but not limited to the 
following: achieving minimum qualifying scores on a prescribed course or test; attaining and 
demonstrating a knowledge of the laws concerning the use of authorized weapons and 
knowledge of departmental policy on the use of force, escalating force, and deadly force; and 
being familiar with safe handling procedures of these weapons. Employees, while engaged in 
law enforcement responsibilities with the Atlanta Police Department, will not carry or use 
unauthorized lethal and/or less lethal weapons while on or off duty. 

All employees authorized to carry and use city-issued and/or authorized firearms will (on at least 
an annual basis) receive in-service training on the department’s use of deadly force policy and 
demonstrate proficiency with all approved firearms that the employee is authorized to use. A 
Peace Officer Standards and Training Council (P.O.S.T.) certified weapons instructor will monitor 
firearm proficiency training. The Training Section will maintain documentation of firearm 
proficiency. (State Law Enforcement Certification Program, 5th.ed.Standard 1.15) 

All employees authorized to carry and use city-issued and/or authorized less lethal weapons will 
(on at least an annual basis) receive training and demonstrate proficiency on the use of all 
approved less lethal weapons that the employee is authorized to use. (State Law Enforcement 
Certification Program, 5th.ed.Standard 1.14) 

Page 3 of 7 

   

4.4.4 

 
4.4.5 

 
4.5 

4.5.1 

 

4.5.2 

 
4.5.3 

 
4.5.4 

 
4.5.5 

 
 
 

 

 
2. 

ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL 

APD.SOP.3010 
Use of Force 

 
 

 

 

Employees who are unable to qualify with authorized lethal or less lethal weapons, and fail to 
meet minimum POST standards, must successfully complete remedial training prior to resuming 
official law enforcement duties. 

All employees authorized to carry and use city-issued and/or authorized lethal and less lethal 
weapons will be issued a copy of the department’s use of force policy prior to being issued such 
weapon(s). The issuance and instruction of the department’s use of force policy must be 
documented. Training Section shall maintain such documentation.  

Reporting Requirements 
(CALEA 5th ed. Standard 1.3.6) 
 
Any employee who discharges a city-issued or approved firearm for any reason other than for 
training purposes or target practice at an established firing range is required to immediately 
notify his or her supervisor.   

1.  An incident report describing the incident must be completed on ICIS and submitted prior to 

the end of that employee’s tour of duty.   

If the incident occurs off duty and outside the city’s jurisdiction, an incident report describing 
the incident must be completed on ICIS and submitted the next day the employee reports 
for duty.  

 
Any employee who applies force or takes an action that results in, or is alleged to have resulted 
in, the physical injury or death of another person is required to immediately notify his or her 
supervisor. An incident report describing the incident must be completed on ICIS and submitted 
prior to the end of that employee’s tour of duty.  

Any employee who applies force through the use of lethal or less lethal weapons is required to 
immediately notify his or her supervisor. An incident report describing the incident must be 
completed on ICIS and submitted prior to the end of that employee’s tour of duty.   

Any employee who applies weaponless control techniques to the extent that it is likely to cause 
or lead to physical injury, a claim of injury, or an allegation of excessive force is required to 
immediately notify his or her supervisor. An incident report describing the incident must be 
completed on ICIS and submitted prior to the end of that employee’s tour of duty. This does not 
require reporting the use of techniques that have little or no chance of producing injuries when 
gaining control over, subduing non-compliant or resisting persons when no injury results. These 
techniques include, but are not limited to: physical touching, holding, frisking, come-along, 
handcuffing, or other custodial procedures. 

Any employee who applies intentional force against property that results in damage to that 
property is required to immediately notify his or her supervisor. An incident report describing the 
incident must be completed on ICIS and submitted prior to the end of that employee’s tour of 
duty.  The supervisor is required to complete a Use of Force report. In instances whereby more 
than one officer intentionally utilizes force against one’s property which results in damage to that 
that property, all involved officers shall be listed on the ICIS incident report and the use of force 
report. 

Page 4 of 7 

   

4.5.6 

 
4.5.7 

 
4.5.8 

 
4.5.9 

 
4.5.10 

 
4.6 
 
 
4.6.1 

 
4.6.2 

 
4.6.3 

 
4.6.4 

 
4.6.5 

 
4.7 
 
4.7.1 

 
4.7.2 
 
4.7.3 

ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL 

APD.SOP.3010 
Use of Force 

 
 

 

 

 

Employees who are off duty and use force while acting in a law enforcement capacity as outlined 
in sections 4.5.1 through 4.5.5 must immediately contact an on-duty supervisor in the zone of 
occurrence. An incident report describing the incident must be completed and submitted at that 
time.  

Employees who are working extra jobs and use force as defined in sections 4.5.1 through 4.5.5 
must immediately contact an on-duty supervisor in the zone of occurrence.  An incident report 
describing the incident must be completed and submitted at that time.  The responding 
supervisor will complete a Use of Force Report (Form APD 809). 

Employees will use the pull-in code of “17F” after all incidents requiring the use of force.  The 
supervisor completing the Use of Force report will verify with radio that the “17F” pull-in was 
used. 

The communications dispatcher will record in the call narrative which supervisor verified the use 
of the “17F” pull-in. 

In instances whereby an employee is injured or otherwise unable to complete an incident report, 
as outlined in section 4.5 of this directive, his or her supervisor will complete that report. 
Whereby the employee’s supervisor is unavailable, the on duty supervisor will complete the 
report.  When, and if able to do so, the employee shall complete and submit a follow-up 
supplemental incident report on ICIS detailing their use of force. 

Chain of Command Review 
(CALEA 5th ed.Standard 1.3.7) 

The employee’s supervisor must report to the scene of any incident defined in sections 4.5.2 
through 4.5.5. 

An on duty supervisor will report to the scene of any incident described in sections 4.5.6 and 
4.5.7.  

The employee’s supervisor will assist the officer as necessary and will investigate the 
employee’s use of force.  

The responding supervisor must complete a Use of Force Report (Form APD 809) on any 
incident defined in sections 4.5.2 though 4.5.7 before the end of that tour of duty.  A hard copy of 
this form will be forwarded to the Central Records Unit through ones chain of command. 

Supervisors will be responsible for initiating an investigation of suspected employee work rule 
violations arising out of an employee’s use of force.  The Office of Professional Standards will 
investigate suspected employee work rule violations arising out of an employee’s use of force in 
accordance with APD.SOP.2020 “Disciplinary Process.” 

Maintenance of Use of Force Reports 

The Central Records Unit will receive all Use of Force Reports (Form APD 809) and immediately 
assign a control number to received reports. 

The Central Records Unit will keep all Use of Force Reports on file for five years. 

The Central Records Unit will make copies of Use of Force Reports and forward copies to: 

Page 5 of 7 

   

 

4.8 

 
4.8.1 

 
4.8.2 

 
4.8.3 

 
5. 
 
5.1 

 
5.2 

 
5.3 

 
5.4 

 
5.5 
 
5.6 

 

 

ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL 

APD.SOP.3010 
Use of Force 

 
 

 

1.  The appropriate division commander;  
 
2.  The appropriate section commander;  
 
3.  The Office of Professional Standards;  
 
4.  The Training Section; and 
 
5.  The Planning and Research/Accreditation Unit (PRAU). 
 
Analysis of Use of Force Reports 
(CALEA 5th ed. Standard 1.3.13) 

The Training Section will conduct an annual analysis of all use of force reports filed to determine 
if any patterns or trends in the use of force exist within the department that would affect the 
training needs of employees, equipment issued to employees, or departmental policy and 
procedure. Copies will be provided to the Chief of Police, the Office of Professional Standards, 
the Planning and Research/Accreditation Unit, and the City of Atlanta Law Department. Copies 
of this report will be kept on file for five years by the Training Section. 

The Training Unit will refer any employee work rule violations to the Office of Professional 
Standards. 

The Communications Section will produce a monthly list of all incidents with a “17F” pull-in and 
forward that list to the Office of Professional Standards, the Training Section, and the Planning 
and Research/Accreditation Unit (PRAU). 

DEFINITIONS 

Authorized weapon: a lethal or less lethal tool or instrument approved or issued by the 
Department for official use by employees.  

Deadly force: that amount or degree of force that is likely to cause or actually results in, death or 
serious physical injury.  

Lethal weapon: a firearm or anything manifestly designed, made, or adapted for the purpose of 
inflicting death or serious physical injury or anything that in the manner of its use or intended use 
can cause death or serious physical injury.  

Less lethal weapon: any weapon or instrument used as a weapon that is not manifestly 
designed, made, or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death or serious physical injury. These 
specifically include OC spray and expandable baton (ASP).  

Physical injury: visible impairment of physical condition or the complaint of physical pain. 

Reasonable: the reasonableness inquiry refers to whether officer’s actions are “objectively 
reasonable” in light of the facts and circumstances confronting him or her, without regard to their 
underlying intent or motivation. The “reasonableness” of a particular use of force must be judged 
from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, and its calculus must embody an 
allowance for the fact that police officers are often forced to make split second decisions about 
the amount of force necessary in a particular situation (Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989) 

Page 6 of 7 

   

 

ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL 

APD.SOP.3010 
Use of Force 

 
 

 

 

pp. 396-397). Reasonableness, in analyzing the use of force, is not capable of precise definition 
or mechanical application. In determining whether an employee’s use of force is reasonable in a 
particular case, it is necessary to evaluate the facts and circumstances confronting the employee 
at the time force was administered. All of the surrounding circumstances will be considered, 
including but not limited to whether the subject against whom force was used posed an 
immediate threat to the safety of the employee or others, the severity of the crime in question, 
and whether the subject actively resisted or attempted to flee. The evaluation of an employee’s 
use of force will be undertaken from the perspective of a reasonable officer present on the 
scene. The central inquiry in every use of force case is whether or not the amount of force 
applied was objectively reasonable in light of the particular circumstances perceived by the 
employee.  

Serious physical injury: a bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death; causes serious, 
permanent disfigurement; or results in long-term loss or impairment of the functioning of any 
bodily member or organ. 
 
Weaponless Control Techniques: Any touching or handling of an individual in order to overcome 
resistance and establish control. 

APD.SOP.3010 “Use of Force” revised November 1, 2012. 

CANCELLATIONS 

REFERENCES 

APD.SOP.2010 “Work Rules” 
APD.SOP.2020 “Disciplinary Process” 
APD.SOP.2060 “Extra Jobs” 
APD.SOP.3040 “Weapons” 
APD.SOP.3060 “Reports and Report Writing” 
APD FORM 809 “Use of Force Report” 

Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) 5th ed. Standards 1.3.1; 
1.3.2; 1.3.3; 1.3.4; 1.3.5; 1.3.6; 1.3.7; 1.3.8; 1.3.9; 1.3.10; 1.3.11; 1.3.12; 1.3.13 

State Law Enforcement Certification Program, 5th ed. Standards, 1.14, 1.15 

Georgia Criminal Code 17-4-20 (b) 

 

Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989) 

 
5.7 

 
5.8 

 
6. 
 
 
 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 7 of 7 

  