 
 

 

Number:   SO 20-28 
 
Date:        June 11, 2020 
 
Post/Mention:  Indefinite 

 

 
  

  

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

SUBJECT:  RULE 303A – USE OF LESS - LETHAL FORCE 

Rule 303A, Use of Less – Lethal Force, is hereby amended superseding all previous rules, 
special orders, memos and directives on this subject and is effective immediately. 

Commanding Officers shall ensure that this order and the attached Rule are posted on 
Department bulletin boards. 

William G. Gross 
Police Commissioner 

Boston Police Department                             

 

 

Rules and Procedures 

Rule 303A 

            June 11, 2020 

USE OF LESS - LETHAL FORCE 

Statement on Use of Force: 
The Boston Police Department is committed to de-escalating incidents to negate the need 
for the use of force.  When force is necessary the Boston Police Department is committed to 
using only the amount of force that is reasonably necessary to overcome the resistance 
offered.   The Boston Police Department is equally committed to preventing unnecessary 
force, ensuring accountability and transparency, and building trust with our community.  
The Boston Police Department respects the inherent life, liberty, dignity, and worth of all 
individuals by preserving human life, and minimizing physical harm and the reliance on 
use of force. 

De-escalation:  Prior to using physical, non-deadly and/or deadly force, all Boston police 
officers, when possible and feasible, will use proper de-escalation techniques to decrease the 
likelihood that officers will need to utilize use of force, and to minimize the level of force 
required.  This includes using effective communication techniques to engage with 
individuals who are not compliant with orders by establishing rapport, asking questions 
and providing advice to defuse conflict and achieve voluntary compliance before resorting 
to force options. 

Where feasible, police officers will try to determine whether an individual’s failure to 
comply with an order is the result of one the following factors: 

• Medical conditions 
• Mental impairment 
• Developmental disability 
• Physical limitation 
• Language barrier 
• Drug interaction 
• Behavioral crisis, or 
• Other factors beyond the individual’s control 

When feasible, after evaluating whether the individual’s failure to comply with an order is 
based on one of the factor’s listed above, the police officer may then determine whether 
physical force, and what level of physical force, is necessary and appropriate to resolve the 
situation in a safe manner. 

When feasible and safe, officers should give verbal warnings when use of force is going to 
be used.  In some cases there may not be an opportunity to give verbal commands or 
warnings. 

If the situation is not an arrestable offense, and the manner cannot be resolved safely, the 
officer may disengage. 

See Special Order 20-2 Street Outreach Unit and Referral Procedures.  The Street 
Outreach Unit is a resource available to support all officers when dealing with individuals 
suffering from substance use disorder, mental health and/or homelessness.  

Duty to Intervene:  Police officers are reminded of Rule 113 Public Integrity Policy, Sec. 5 
Cannon of Ethics, Number Nine. 

Canon Nine: Police officers shall use only that amount of force reasonably necessary to 
achieve their lawful purpose. Excessive or unauthorized force is never justified and every 
officer not only has an affirmative duty to intervene to prevent such violence, but also to 
report any such instances that may come to their attention. 

This rule is issued to establish guidelines for the use of less-lethal force by members of this 
Department in the performance of their duties, and to establish appropriate training, reporting, 
and documentation for such use of force. 

Sec. 1 DEFINITIONS: 
1.1 Less-Lethal Force Philosophy is a concept of planning and force application that meets 
operational objectives, with less potential for causing death or serious physical injury than the 
use of deadly force. 
 
1.2 Reasonableness is moderate and/or fair action within reason, suitable to the confrontation. 
 
1.3 Super Sock Round, also known as a flexible projectile, is fired through a 12 gauge shotgun. 

Sec. 2 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS: 
The Department has adopted the less-lethal force philosophy to assist in the de-escalation of 
potentially violent situations. The less-lethal force philosophy shall not preclude the use of 
deadly force. 

Sec. 3 TRAINING AND QUALIFICATION: 
Training shall consist of Department approved training and qualification program in the use of a 
12 gauge shotgun. Supervisors and personnel assigned to the Special Operations SWAT Team, 
shall be trained and qualify two times per year in the proper use of a less lethal shotgun. 
Supervisors and personnel assigned to the Special Operations SWAT Team trained in the use of 
this weapon will be held accountable for proficiency as well as compliance with Department 
policy in the use of such weapon. 

Sec. 4 SECURING OF LESS LETHAL SHOTGUN AND AMMUNITION: 
Each less lethal shotgun shall be stored in a District gun locker in a safe condition (i.e. safety on, 
action open, chamber and magazine empty). Flexible projectile rounds shall be stored and 
secured along with the weapon in the District gun locker. The less lethal shotgun will have an 
orange colored stock. The words "less lethal" will be noted on the stock to identify that the less 
lethal shotgun is used strictly for flexible projectile rounds. Every Thursday the day tour Duty 
Supervisor shall perform a visual inspection to verify that the shotgun is stored in a safe 

condition, as well as insure that the requisite number of flexible projectile rounds are accounted 
for.  This information shall be recorded in a District Control Log. 
During the Patrol Supervisor's tour of duty, the less lethal shotgun shall be loaded with four 
flexible projectile rounds in the magazine, with an empty chamber, with safety lock on, and 
secured in the locking device located in the trunk of the Patrol Supervisor's vehicle. 
SWAT Team personnel shall secure, inspect, issue and transport the less lethal shotgun according 
to protocol established by the commander of the Special Operations Division. The SWAT armory 
and tactical car vaults will be utilized for secure storage as appropriate. 

Sec. 5 AUTHORIZATION AND USE OF LESS LETHAL WEAPONS: 
Only supervisors and SWAT Team personnel who have completed the Department training and 
qualification program shall be authorized to use a 12 gauge less lethal shotgun. 
If the possibility of the use of less lethal force is determined to be an option the Patrol Supervisor 
shall be notified and respond to the scene. If the possibility of the use of less lethal force is 
determined to be a reasonable option by the Patrol Supervisor, then the Patrol Supervisor shall 
notify the Boston Emergency Medical Services to respond.  Before each and every round is 
discharged, the Patrol Supervisor shall announce in a loud and clear voice the word 
“BEANBAG.” 

SWAT Team personnel shall deploy the less lethal weapons in accordance with their training and/
or at the direction of SWAT Team supervisor(s). Where feasible, SWAT team personnel shall 
notify the Boston Emergency Medical Services to respond and before each and every round is 
discharged, the SWAT team personnel shall announce in a loud and clear voice the word 
“BEANBAG.” 

The Patrol Supervisor shall designate an on-scene officer to provide lethal force coverage and, if 
deemed appropriate shall designate two or more officers for suspect take down. 
 
Upon discharge of the shotgun the District Commander and Duty Supervisor shall be notified. 
Suspects who are struck by a flexible projectile round shall be transported to a medical facility 
for examination. 

Sec. 6 REPORTING AND INVESTIGATION: 
Any discharge of a less lethal shotgun other than training shall be investigated pursuant to Rule 
303. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

William G. Gross 
Police Commissioner 

