Columbus Police
Division Directive

EFFECTIVE

REVISED

Aug. 01, 1987 

Dec. 30, 2017 

NUMBER

2.01
TOTAL  PAGES
11

Use of Force

I.  Definitions
A.  Use of Force

 

The exertion of energy or the actions of personnel in the performance 
of their duties used to direct or control another’s movements or actions. 
A use of force may be implemented to control resistive or aggressive 
behavior toward the involved personnel, other personnel, third parties, 
or property.

B.  Use of Force Levels of Control

1.  Levels of Control used by the Division of Police for reporting purposes 

are:

Level 0:  Officer  presence,  verbal  and  non-verbal  commands,  search-
ing, handcuffing, sparking a taser for compliance, and using 
flashbangs and multiple baton rounds as diversions
Level 1:  Empty hand control, pressure points, grounding techniques, and 

joint manipulations

Level 2:  Use of chemical spray
Level 3:  Use of electronic device (electronic custody belt, taser or  

 

 

Electronic Control Weapon (ECW))

Level 4:  Hard empty hand control (strike/punch/kick)
Level 5:  Use of impact weapon (baton/flashlight)
Level 6:  Police K-9 bite
Level 7:  Less lethal weapons (beanbag/multiple baton rounds
Level 8:  Deadly force

  Any force which carries a substantial risk that it will proximately result 

C.  Deadly Force

in the death of any person.

D.  Injury

1.  For the purposes of this directive, injuries are classified as:

a.  Minor Injury
 
b.  Serious Injury
 

An injury that does not require transport to a medical facility.

An injury that requires transport to a medical facility for treatment.

Directive 2.01 

Revised 12/30/17 

Page 1 of 11

Note: If a Division supervisor classifies an injury as minor, refusal at the 
county jail does not require a Use of Force-Injury to Prisoner admin-
istrative investigation.

E.  Taser Application

  One full or partial five-second cycle of the taser.

II.  Policy Statements
A.  General

1.  When reasonable, sworn personnel should try to de-escalate 
a situation by using trained techniques, such as building rap-
port, communication skills, taking cover, etc. This is not an all 
inclusive list. 

2.  It is well established that police officers may use force to effect an arrest, 
to defend themselves, or to defend others. An officer should not desist 
from any official duty merely because resistance is offered. Police officers 
shall not use more force than is reasonable in a particular incident.
3.  Factors  to  be  considered  when  determining  the  reasonableness  of  a 

a.  The severity of the crime at issue.
b.  Whether the subject poses an immediate threat to the safety of the 

use of force are:

officer or others.

c.  Whether the subject is actively resisting arrest.
d.  Whether the subject is attempting to evade arrest by flight.

4.  Force may be used during a medical emergency if:

a.  The  person  experiencing  a  medical  emergency  is  incapable 
of  making  a  rational  decision  under  the  circumstances  and 
poses an immediate threat of serious harm to himself, herself, 
or others.

b.  Some degree of force is reasonably necessary to minimize the 

c.  The force being used is reasonably necessary under the cir-

immediate threat.

cumstances.

5.  Sworn  personnel  should  take  into  consideration  an  unarmed 

person’s known mental health status prior to using force.
6.  Officers shall use their training to guide them through a use of force in-
cident. The preferred response to resistance and aggression is a trained 
technique  reasonable  for  the  circumstances.  However,  during  a 
situation involving the infliction or threatened infliction of serious physi-
cal harm, the use of an untrained response, such as neck restraints, 
while not normally authorized, may be reasonable to end the threat and 
survive  the  encounter.  The  proper  exertion  of  physical  force  used  to 
control the subject shall be consistent with Division policy.

Page 2 of 11 

Revised 12/30/17 

Directive 2.01

7.  All  uses  of  force  shall  be  reported  consistent  with  Division  policies. 
Involved personnel shall notify an available on-duty Division supervisor 
in the following descending order:

a.  Their immediate supervisor;
b.  Another sworn supervisor within their chain of command; or
c.  Any other sworn Division supervisor, who may personally conduct the 
investigation or may notify a supervisor in the involved officer’s chain 
of command to conduct the investigation.

8.  The Internal Affairs Bureau (IAB) shall forward a monthly report to the 
Training  Bureau  that  summarizes  all  Level  2  through  Level  8  Use  of 
Force Reports, form U-10.128, received.

9.  The Training Bureau shall review the monthly summary of Use of Force 
Reports received from IAB along with the original Levels 0 and 1 Use of 
Force Reports to monitor techniques for their effectiveness and to make 
approved changes in trained techniques and lesson plans.

10. All sworn Division personnel shall receive annual in-service training in 

the Division’s use of force policy.

11. Division supervisors conducting use of force investigations shall photo-

graph involved persons as detailed in the Supervisor’s Manual.

12. Restrictions on Supervisors Conducting Investigations

a.  Division supervisors who actively participate in or order a use of force 
shall not conduct any subsequent investigation. This restriction does 
not apply to tactical situations, for example, those involving SWAT, 
In-Tac, or field forces.

b.  When a Division supervisor is prohibited from conducting the investiga-
tion, the involved supervisor’s immediate supervisor or, if unavailable, 
another Division supervisor of a higher rank than the involved super-
visor shall be contacted. The contacted supervisor may conduct the 
investigation or may assign it to an alternate supervisor.
13. If requested, IAB shall conduct an administrative investigation.
Note: Personnel who are the focus of a criminal investigation may invoke 
their  constitutional  rights.  This  does  not  apply  if  the  investigation  is 
strictly administrative in nature. Information compelled from the focus 
employee in an administrative investigation shall not be shared with, or 
in any manner released to, any unit conducting a criminal investigation, 
except as pursuant to the Ohio Public Records Act.

14. Sworn  personnel  shall  not  use  any  force  for  a  retaliatory  or 

punitive purpose.

B.  Deadly Force

1.  Sworn personnel may use deadly force when the involved personnel 
have reason to believe the response is objectively reasonable to protect 
themselves or others from the imminent threat of death or serious physi-
cal harm.
Directive 2.01 

Revised 12/30/17 

Page 3 of 11

2.  Sworn personnel may use deadly force upon a human being to prevent 
escape when there is probable cause to believe that the subject poses 
an immediate threat of serious physical harm to others.

3.  Sworn personnel not in a vehicle should avoid positioning themselves 
in the path of a moving vehicle or in a position vulnerable to being 
struck if the vehicle were suddenly moved.

a.  Sworn personnel in the direct path or a position vulnerable to being 
struck by a moving vehicle should attempt to take evasive action to 
avoid being struck by the vehicle.

b.  Sworn personnel may only fire a weapon at the driver or occupant of a 
moving vehicle when there is an articulable, reasonable belief that the 
subject poses an immediate threat of death or serious physical harm 
to himself, herself, or others.

c.	 Sworn	 personnel	 should	 not	 extend	 their	 displayed	 firearm	
inside the passenger compartment of an occupied vehicle. 
d.  Sworn  personnel  should  avoid  reaching  into  a  vehicle  and 

position(s) that make them vulnerable to being dragged.
4.  If  reasonable,  sworn  personnel  should  give  a  verbal  warning  of  the 

intention to use deadly force.

5.  While sworn personnel have an affirmative duty to use that degree of 
force reasonable to protect human life, the use of deadly force is not rea-
sonable merely to protect property interests. Only under circumstances 
where it is reasonable to believe an infliction or threatened infliction of 
serious physical harm to human life exists is the use of deadly force 
justified.

6.  The use of deadly force by sworn personnel should not create a danger 

to the public that outweighs the benefits of its use.

7.  Sworn personnel shall not fire a warning shot unless there is justification 

to use deadly force and should ensure:

a.	 There	are	no	bystanders	in	the	line	of	fire	or	that	could	move	

b.  The backstop is reasonably likely to contain or stop the dis-

into	the	line	of	fire;	and

charged bullet.

8.  Facts unknown to sworn personnel at the time deadly force is used can-
not be considered in determining whether the involved personnel acted 
in conformity with this policy.

9.  Investigations of uses of force resulting in death shall be forwarded to 
the county prosecutor in the county in which the incident occurred. That 
prosecutor will determine if the case will be presented to a grand jury.

Page 4 of 11 

Revised 12/30/17 

Directive 2.01

C. Use of Firearm Against Dangerous Animals

1.  Sworn personnel being threatened or attacked by a dangerous 
animal should attempt to use trained techniques and/or interme-
diate	weapons	before	using	a	firearm	to	protect	themselves	or	
another person. If these attempts fail to halt the animal’s attack, 
and	when	left	with	no	alternative	other	than	to	use	a	firearm,	
sworn  personnel  should  determine  whether  the  backstop  is 
able	 to	 control	 and	 contain	 any	 projectiles	 that	 may	 not	 find	
their intended mark or that may ricochet. Consider the presence 
of individuals and their actions relative to the proximity of the 
dangerous animal. Grassy and/or dirt areas are the preferred 
location for a backstop.

2.	 Sworn	 personnel	 shall	 not	 fire	 or	 deploy	 a	 weapon	 at	 a	 dan-
gerous animal unless the animal poses an imminent threat to 
personnel or others, use of the weapon is reasonable, and the 
risk to human life is minimized. 

3.	 Sworn	personnel	shall	not	use	a	firearm	to	prevent	or	disrupt	

an animal attacking another animal.

Note:	Pets	are	deemed	to	be	property,	and	a	firearm	is	not	to	be	

used to protect property.

III.  Procedures
A.  Level of Control 0 (Sparking a Taser for Compliance) or Level of Control 

1 with No Injury

1.  Involved Personnel

  Complete a Use of Force Report and forward it to your immediate su-
pervisor by the end of your shift or by the beginning of your next shift if 
the incident occurred outside of assigned duty hours. If your immediate 
supervisor is unavailable, forward the report to any on-duty supervisor 
within your chain of command.

2.  Investigating Supervisor

a.  Review and sign the Use of Force Report.
b.  Forward the report directly to IAB.
c.  Forward a copy of the report to the immediate supervisor of the involved 

personnel.

3.  Internal Affairs Bureau

  Forward the original Use of Force Report to the Training Bureau.
B.  Level of Control 0 or 1 with a Complaint of an Injury Caused by the Re-

sponse - No Serious Physical Harm to a Human

1.  Involved Personnel

a.  Cause any needed medical aid to be rendered.

Directive 2.01 

Revised 12/30/17 

Page 5 of 11

b.  Immediately notify, or cause notification of, an on-duty Division supervi-

c.  Complete a Use of Force Report and give it to the investigating supervi-

sor.

sor.

2.  Investigating Supervisor

a.  Review and sign the Use of Force Report.
b.  Minor Injury
(1)  Complete  a  Data  Processing  Worksheet,  form  U-10.164,  and  at-
tach the Use of Force Report; a copy of the Arrest Information, form 
U-10.100; and any photographs taken.

(2)  Forward the packet directly to IAB.
(3)  Forward a copy of the report to the immediate supervisor of the in-

volved personnel.

c.  Serious Injury
(1)  Complete  an  Injury  to  Prisoner  administrative  investigation  and  a 
Data Processing Worksheet. Attach the Use of Force Report and a 
copy of the Arrest Information form.

(2)  Forward the packet through the chain of command to IAB.

a.  If applicable, record the incident in the involved personnel’s IAB data-

b.  Maintain a file copy of the Use of Force Report.
c.  Forward the original Use of Force Report to the Training Bureau.

3.  Internal Affairs Bureau

base record.

C.  Level of Control 2 

1.  Involved Personnel

a.  Cause any needed medical aid to be rendered.
b.  Immediately notify, or cause notification of, an on-duty supervisor.
c.  Complete a Use of Force Report and give it to the investigating supervi-

sor.

2.  Investigating Supervisor

a.  Review and sign the Use of Force Report.
b.  Forward a copy of the report to the immediate supervisor of the involved 

personnel.

c.  If the subject is being arrested or issued a summons:
(1)  Ensure that the arresting personnel include the facts necessitating the 
use of chemical spray and details of the decontamination/treatment 
rendered in the narrative section of the Arrest Information form.
(2)  Include a brief statement indicating justification for the use of chemi-
cal spray, the effectiveness of the chemical spray, and details of the 
decontamination process and treatment rendered on the Use of Force 
Report.

Page 6 of 11 

Revised 12/30/17 

Directive 2.01

(3)  Ensure that an “X” is placed in both the “Chemical Spray” box on the 
top left corner and the “Use of Force” box on the top right corner on 
the front of the Arrest Information form.

(4)  Complete  a  Data  Processing  Worksheet,  attach  the  Use  of  Force 
Report and a copy of the Arrest Information form, and forward the 
packet through the involved personnel’s chain of command to IAB.

d.  If no arrest is made, add comments to the back of the Use of Force 
Report, and forward it along with a Data Processing Worksheet through 
the involved personnel’s chain of command to IAB.

e.  If circumstances indicate that the use of chemical spray was not within 
Division policy, complete an investigation as indicated on the Use of 
Force Report, and forward it along with a Data Processing Worksheet 
through the involved personnel’s chain of command to IAB.

f.  For a Level of Control 2 against a handcuffed subject: 
(1)  Identify and interview the following:

(a)  Involved Division personnel
(b)  All available witnesses
(c)  The subject upon whom chemical spray was used

(2)  Review and sign the Use of Force Report.
(3)  Complete an administrative investigation.
(4)  Complete  a  Data  Processing  Worksheet;  attach  the  Use  of  Force 
Report, a copy of the Arrest Information form, and the administrative 
investigation;and forward the packet through the involved personnel’s 
chain of command to IAB.

3.  Commander

  Make a final determination for Level of Control 2 (not against a hand-
cuffed  subject)  unless  deviation  from  progressive  discipline  and/or 
departmental  charges  are  recommended.  Forward  the  investigative 
packet to IAB.

4.  Deputy Chief

a.  Make a final determination for Level of Control 2 against a handcuffed 
subject unless deviation from progressive discipline and/or departmental 
charges are recommended.

b.  Forward the investigative packet to IAB.
c.  Cause the involved personnel to be notified of the final determination 
when no discipline or progressive discipline not resulting in departmental 
charges is the result.
5.  Internal Affairs Bureau

a.  Record the incident in the involved personnel’s IAB database record.
b.  Maintain the original Use of Force Report.

Directive 2.01 

Revised 12/30/17 

Page 7 of 11

D.  Level of Control 3

1.  Involved Personnel

a.  Cause any needed medical aid to be rendered.
b.  Immediately notify, or cause notification of, an on-duty supervisor.
c.  Complete a Use of Force Report and a Use of Taser Report, form U-

10.128T, and give them to the investigating supervisor.

2.  Investigating Supervisor

a.  Identify and interview the following:
(1)  Involved Division personnel
(2)  All available witnesses
(3)  The subject upon whom the taser was used
b.  Review and sign the Use of Force Report and the Use of Taser Report.
c.  Complete  the  Data  Processing  Worksheet;  attach  the  Use  of  Force 
Report, Use of Taser Report, any photographs taken, and a copy of the 
Arrest Information form; and forward the packet through the involved 
personnel’s chain of command to IAB.

d.  For a Level of Control 3 against a handcuffed subject, when three or 
more cycles of the taser are applied to one subject, when one taser is 
applied to multiple subjects during the same incident, or when multiple 
tasers are applied to the same subject:

(1)  Complete an administrative investigation.
(2)  Attach the administrative investigation to the Data Processing Work-
sheet, Use of Force Report, Use of Taser Report, any photographs 
taken, and a copy of the Arrest Information form, and forward the 
packet through the involved personnel’s chain of command to IAB.

3.  Deputy Chief

a.  Make a final determination for Level of Control 3 unless deviation from 
progressive discipline and/or departmental charges are recommended.

b.  Forward the investigative packet to IAB.
c.  Cause the involved personnel to be notified of the final determination 
when no discipline or progressive discipline not resulting in departmental 
charges is the result.
4.  Internal Affairs Bureau

a.  Record the incident in the involved personnel’s IAB database record.
b.  Maintain the original Use of Force Report.

E.  Level of Control 4 through 7

1.  Involved Personnel

a.  Cause any needed medical aid to be rendered.
b.  Immediately notify, or cause notification of, an on-duty supervisor.
c.  Complete a Use of Force Report and give it to the investigating supervi-

sor.

Page 8 of 11 

Revised 12/30/17 

Directive 2.01

2.  Investigating Supervisor

a.  Identify and interview the following:
(1)  Involved Division personnel
(2)  All available witnesses
(3)  The subject upon whom the use of force was used
b.  Review the Use of Force Report.
c.  Complete an administrative investigation.
d.  Complete  a  Data  Processing  Worksheet;  attach  the  Use  of  Force 
Report, a copy of the Arrest Information form, and the administrative 
investigation; and forward the packet through the involved personnel’s 
chain of command to IAB.

3.  Deputy Chief

a.  Make  a  final  determination  for  Levels  of  Control  4  through  7  unless 
deviation from progressive discipline and/or departmental charges are 
recommended.

b.  Forward the investigative packet to IAB.
c.  Cause the involved personnel to be notified of the final determination 
when no discipline or progressive discipline not resulting in departmental 
charges is the result.
4.  Internal Affairs Bureau

a.  Record the incident in the involved personnel’s IAB database record.
b.  Maintain the original Use of Force Report.

F.  Use of Force Resulting in Serious Physical Harm to or Death of a Human
Note: If the use of force involves the discharge of a firearm other than a gas 
gun, follow the procedures set forth in the “Discharged Firearms” directive. 
If the use of force involves the discharge of a gas gun, follow the proce-
dures set forth in the “Gas Guns and Grenades” directive.

1.  Involved Personnel

a.  Cause any needed medical aid to be rendered.
b.  Immediately cause Communications Bureau personnel to be notified.
c.  Secure the scene.

2.  Communications Bureau

a.  Dispatch personnel to render assistance or to secure the scene.
b.  Notify  the  Columbus  Division  of  Fire  and  those  listed  on  the 

Emergency	Notification	Guide.

Note: The  Investigative  Duty  Desk  will  contact  the  Critical  Incident  Re-

sponse Team.
3.  Officer Support Team

  Provide  the  involved  personnel  with  any  assistance,  information,  or 

other support they may desire.

Directive 2.01 

Revised 12/30/17 

Page 9 of 11

Note: Officer Support Team members are subject to being subpoenaed to 
attend legal proceedings and testify to what they are told by the involved 
personnel. Therefore, Officer Support Team members are cautioned not 
to discuss the incident.

4.  Critical Incident Response Team

a.  Conduct a criminal investigation.
b.  Advise personnel who are the focus of the investigation of their consti-

tutional rights.

Note: The involved personnel may invoke their constitutional rights at any 

time during the criminal investigation.

c.  Complete the Use of Force Report and Data Processing Worksheet 

and attach both to the original investigative packet.

d.  File the original investigative packet.
e.  Forward copies of the investigative packet as follows:
(1)  One copy to the appropriate county prosecutor
(2)  Three copies to the Firearms/Police-Involved Death Review Board if a 
firearm was used or if death occurred under circumstances involving 
a police action

5.  Firearms/Police-Involved Death Review Board

a.  Review all information concerning the incident.
b.  Determine whether the police action was within Division policy.
c.  Prepare and forward a summary of the findings, together with the original 
investigative packet, the Use of Force Report, and the Data Processing 
Worksheet, through the involved personnel’s chain of command to the 
deputy chief.

Note: If there is a dissenting opinion between the Firearms/Police-Involved 
Death Review Board members, the dissenting member will include a 
letter of finding with the investigative packet and route it through the 
involved personnel’s chain of command to the Chief of Police.

6.  Immediate Supervisor

a.  Review the entire investigative packet and make recommendations.
b.  Forward the investigative packet through the chain of command.

7.  Chain of Command

8.  Deputy Chief

  Review the entire investigative packet and make recommendations.

a.  Review the investigative packet.
b.  Make a final determination concerning the incident unless deviation from 
progressive discipline and/or departmental charges are recommended.
Note: If the recommendation of the deputy chief is in disagreement with the 
finding of the Firearms/Police-Involved Death Review Board, forward 
the investigative packet to the Chief of Police.

Page 10 of 11 

Revised 12/30/17 

Directive 2.01

c.  Forward the investigative packet to IAB.
d.  Cause the involved personnel to be notified of the final determination 
when no discipline or progressive discipline not resulting in departmental 
charges is the result.

9.  Chief of Police

a.  Make the final determination when a recommendation to bypass pro-

gressive discipline is made.

b.  Make a final determination if there are dissenting opinions between 
the  Firearms/Police-Involved  Death  Review  Board  and  the  involved 
personnel’s deputy chief. 

c.  Cause the involved personnel to be notified of the determination.

10. Internal Affairs Bureau

a.  Record the disposition of the incident in the involved personnel’s IAB 

database.

b.  Maintain the original Use of Force Report.

Directive 2.01 

Revised 12/30/17 

Page 11 of 11

