Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

900.00 Response Continuum Table of Contents 
DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 6/03/2015 

Levels of Subject Resistance 
Levels of Control 
Variables that Impact the Response Continuum 

 
 900.00     RESPONSE CONTINUUM 
 
 901.00     RESPONSE CONTINUUM 
 
 901.01  Response Continuum Philosophy 
 901.02  Use of Physical Control Techniques 
 901.03 
 901.04 
 901.05 
 
902.00 
 
902.01 
902.02 
 
 903.00  USE OF RESTRAINING HOLDS  
 
 903.01 
 
 904.00 
 
 905.00  HANDLING SUSPECTS EXHIBITING SYMPTOMS OF DRUG-INDUCED PSYCHOSIS/ 

Oleoresin Capsicum Chemical Spray (OC Spray) 
Pepperball Launcher System – Usage and Procedures  

CHEMICAL SPRAY AND PEPPERBALL LAUNCHER SYSTEM 

Team Take-Down Contact Control 

IMPACT WEAPONS  

EXCITED DELIRIUM  

 

 906.00     USE OF DEADLY FORCE 

 
 906.01 
 906.02  Use of Deadly Force Policy 

Philosophy 

ELECTRONIC CONTROL WEAPON (ECW) 

Tactical Considerations 
Follow-Up Care 

 
 907.00 
 
 907.01      Definitions 
 907.02  General Deployment Policy 
 907.03 
Authorization and Training 
 907.04  Use and Deployment 
 907.05 
 907.06 
 907.07  Reporting and Administrative Requirements Regarding the Use of a ECW 
 907.08 
 907.09 
 
 908.00  RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE REPORTING 
 
 908.01 
 908.02  General Departmental Policy 
 908.03  Response to Resistance Entry (BlueTeam) 
 908.04  Response to Resistance Statistical Review and Reports 
 

Accidental Discharges 
Storage and Precautions 

Philosophy 

 
Use of Force Response Continuum Chart 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

901.00 Response Continuum 
DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 06/03/2015 

 

 

 
901.00  RESPONSE CONTINUUM 
 
901.01  Response Continuum – Philosophy 

A.  The Response Continuum: 

1. 

Is  a  concept  used  in  incident  handling  that  simultaneously  recognizes  the  level  of  subject  resistance 
encountered and the level of control required for the situation.   
Is an overview that does not direct a particular officer on how much control to use in a particular situation.   
2. 
3.  Gives direction in the escalation and de-escalation of resistance and the escalation and de-escalation of control 

4.  Explains that many variables are involved in situations where an officer must control a subject. 
5.  The Dallas Police Department uses the Linear Response-to-Resistance Continuum as its training model. (see 

necessary in police incidents. 

attached) 

B.  Skillful  use  of  the  options  identified  in  the  Response  Continuum  decreases the  necessity  to  respond  with  physical 
control  techniques  and  increases  the  probability  of  bringing  the  incident  to  a  successful  conclusion.    The  physical 
control techniques used may range from the use of handcuffs in an arrest, strikes with an impact weapon, or the use 
of a firearm. 
In  all  cases  the  Dallas  Police  Department  dictates that  only  reasonably  necessary control  techniques  are  justified.  
Any use of control techniques above that would be unjustified and the goal of control violated.   

C. 

D.  Where  there  is  no  apparent  need  to  take  a  suspect  into  immediate  physical  custody,  officers should  utilize  tactics 
designed  to  de-escalate  the  situation  and  facilitate  a  safer  resolution  whenever  reasonably  possible.    The  use  of 
delaying tactics in order to obtain more favorable physical cover and additional officer presence is encouraged, as 
long as the safety of the officer, citizens, and subject is not compromised in doing so.    

E.  Officers will be in situations where the use of physical control techniques is necessary and justified.  In all cases of 
physical control, the potential exists for injury to officers and subjects.  Officers will ensure that as soon as subjects 
are  brought  under  control,  they  are  placed  in  an  upright  position  (if  possible)  or  on  their  side.    Officers  are 
responsible for rendering first aid to injured subjects.  First aid will include: 
1.  Monitoring the subject. 
2.  Calming the subject through reassurance. 
3.  Checking pulse and skin color. 
4.  Checking for consciousness through the use of interviews. 
5.  Applying direct pressure, if necessary. 

 

 

901.02  Use of Physical Control Techniques 

 
A.  The  use  of  physical control techniques must  be  examined from  two  perspectives:  resistance  (Subject)  and  control 

(Officer).  Both control and resistance can be in the form of verbal directives or physical action. 
1.  Resistance - a subject’s non-compliance to the officer.  The amount and type of resistance varies based on a 

number of factors. 

2.  Control  -  the  force  an  officer  uses  to influence  or  neutralize  a  non-compliant  subject.    Officers  are  justified  in 

using physical control techniques in the following situations: 
a.  To protect the officer or another from injury or death. 
b.  To effect the lawful detention or arrest of a non-compliant subject. 
c.  To stop potentially dangerous and unlawful behavior. 
d.  To protect a subject from self-injury. 

B.  The Dallas Police Department uses broad standards to measure the justification of an officer’s use of physical control 

techniques. 
1.  The control techniques used were initiated by a subject’s resistance. 
2.  The level of control used was necessary and reasonable considering the subject’s resistance. 

C.  A  Show  of  Control  (displaying  tactical  advantage  to  persuade  the  suspect  to  comply  with  verbal  commands)  is 

implemented to influence a subject to make positive decisions.  A Show of Control: 
1.  Reduces reaction time. 
2.  Serves as a visual warning of potential use and imparts to a subject that resistance is futile. 
3.  Adds intermediate steps to the DPD Response Continuum. 
4.  Can be recalled or de-escalated to lower forms of control. 

D.  Use of Control is an action that can result in tissue damage to a subject and when employed cannot be recalled, this 

is to include OC Spray. 

901.03  Levels of Subject Resistance 

 
A.  Psychological Intimidation: Non-verbal clues indicating the subject’s attitude, appearance, and physical readiness. 
B.  Resistive Dialogue: Verbal responses indicating unwillingness or threats. 
C.  Passive Resistance:  Physical actions that do not attempt to defeat the officer’s attempt to control.  The subject will 

not voluntarily comply with verbal and physical attempts of control. 

D.  Defensive  Resistance:  Physical  actions  to  impede  arrest  by  attempting  to  prevent  officer’s  control,  but  does  not 
involve attempts to harm the officer.  This means there has been physical contact between the officer(s) and suspect.  
Simply running from officers who have not made any previous physical contact with the suspect does not constitute 
defensive resistance. 

Dallas Police Department General Order   
901.00 Response Continuum 

Revised 06/03/2015 

 
901.04 

Levels of Control 

E.  Active Aggression: Physical actions of assault toward officer.  This includes a suspect who attempts to attack, grabs, 
punches, kicks, and/or wrestles with the officer, or a suspect that displays an obvious imminent intent to attack, grab, 
punch kick, and/or wrestle with the officer. 

F.  Aggravated Aggression:  Force which in the manner of its use or attempted use reasonably creates a substantial risk 
of death or serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member 
or organ.         

 
A.  Officer  Presence:    Bearing,  confidence,  poise,  and  perceivable  effectiveness  assisting  the  officer  in  incident 
interaction. Officer presence includes two essential elements that are implemented to control the situation from the 
onset: 
1.  Cognitive Skills: Information, such as law and procedures, which gives the officer a foundation of preparation for 

incident interaction. 

2.  Tactical Control: Use of skills and techniques, such as tactical approach, to avoid confrontation and minimize 

risk; use of cover support; tactical disengagement, and tactical withdrawal. 

B.  Verbal Control: Communication skills used by an officer to enhance escalation prevention during incident interaction. 

(Commands of direction, control, or arrest.) 

C.  Empty  Hand  Control:  Empty  hand  control  techniques  depend  upon  the  level  of  subject  resistance.    The  four 

categories of empty hand control are: 
1.  Soft  Empty  Hand  Control  (Techniques  with  a  low  probability  of  injury):  Joint  Locks,  Pressure  Points, 
Handcuffing. Note: If handcuffing is used as a control technique and the subject is subsequently not taken into 
custody, a handwritten or MDT generated MIR must be completed. 

2.  Oleoresin  Capsicum  (OC) Spray  (Technique  that can  result in  tissue  damage,  allergic  reaction,  or  respiratory 

distress). 
a.  Hand held aerosols 
b.  PepperBall area saturation 

901.05  Variables that Impact the Response Continuum 

3.  Electronic Control Weapon. 
4.  Hard Empty Hand Control (Techniques with a probability of injury): Defensive Counterstrikes, Iron Wrist Take-

down, and Brachial Stuns (use of personal weapons, i.e.: hands, feet, etc.) 

D. 

Intermediate Weapons: Use of intermediate weapons is justified for situations when the officer believes empty hand 
control will be ineffective, inappropriate, or when empty hand control has already failed. 
1.  The use of intermediate weapons is categorized as follows: 

a.  Soft Intermediate Weapon Control:  Impact weapon, joint locks, come-a-longs and blocks. 
b.  PepperBall system-direct contact 
c. 

  Hard Intermediate Weapon Control: Impact weapon strikes, jabs, and chops. 

2.  Departmentally authorized batons (refer to General Order 802.23). 

E.  Deadly Force: The use of physical control that will cause death or serious bodily injury.  Deadly Force will only be 

employed in accordance with the Department’s Deadly Force Policy (refer to Section 906.00). 

 

C. 

 
A.  The Response Continuum emphasizes various levels of control exercised by an officer in response to the levels of 
resistance exhibited by a subject.  The appropriate level of control response will be determined by the facts that are 
reasonably apparent to the officer at the time of an incident and at the moment that a level of control is initiated. 
B.  Officers must take  into  consideration  four  variables that impact  Response  Continuum  use.  These  variable  include, 

but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Officer(s)/Subject(s) size, obvious infirmities or disabilities, and age. 
2.  Environmental conditions. 
3.  Reaction time. 
4.  Totality of circumstances. 
In all situations, officers will use only those physical control techniques reasonably necessary to control the situation.  
The  Response  Continuum  provides  a  probability  and  not  a  guarantee  that  the  level  of  subject  resistance  will  not 
escalate. 

 

 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order 

 

902.00 Chemical Spray and Pepperball Launcher System 

 

DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 07/26/10 

 
902.0 
 
902.01  OLEORESIN CAPSICUM CHEMICAL SPRAY (OC SPRAY) 

CHEMICAL SPRAY AND PEPPERBALL LAUNCHER SYST

EM 

 

A.  Oleoresin  Capsicum  Chemical  Spray  (OC  Spray)  is  classified  as  hard  empty  hand  control  on  the  DPD  Response 

Continuum. Only OC Sprays authorized by the Dallas Police Department will be used. 

B.  Policy:    While  control  of  a  suspect  through  advice,  warning,  or  persuasion  is  preferable,  the  use  of  OC  Spray  is 

sometimes necessary.   
1.  Use of OC Spray is justified: 

a.  To control a physically resisting suspect. 
b.  To defend an officer or another person. 
c.  To protect a person from injuring themselves. 
d.  When lesser levels of control are ineffective. 
e.  On physically resisting handcuffed prisoners when a lesser attempt of control is ineffective. 

2.  OC Spray will not be used on subjects who are using techniques of passive resistance or subjects who are not 

posing a physical threat to persons or property. 

3.  Under no circumstances will OC Spray be applied after resistance has ceased. 

1.  Officers  should  be  aware  that  the  reaction  to  OC  Spray  varies  from  subject  to  subject  and  may  not  establish 

C.  Tactical Considerations 

control. 

2.  Caution should be used when using OC Spray against a subject in a building or vehicle.  Officers must consider 

cross-contamination of other officers and subjects balanced with the need to control. 

3.  Caution should be used before OC Spray is used in a health care facility. 
4.  OC  Spray  is  highly  flammable  and  should  not  be  sprayed  into  or  near  an  open  flame.    Use  caution  after 

spraying the product.  Do not allow sprayed subjects to be exposed to an open flame. 

D.  Follow-up Care - Any time resisting or combative subjects are brought under control and handcuffed, place them in 
an upright seated position, if possible.  Subjects may be placed on their side if it is impossible to keep them in an 
upright position.  Officers will monitor subjects until releasing them to a detention facility or medical personnel. 
1.  Handcuff the subject when it is tactically safe to  do so.  As soon as it is reasonably safe  to do so, check the 
subject’s vital signs (pulse and breathing) to determine any apparent medical difficulties.  Place the subject in a 
sitting  position  or  roll  the  subject  onto  his/her  side.    Do  not  place  in  a  prone  position  as  it  could  result  in 
positional asphyxia.  Provide constant monitoring of the subject until after transport to the Lew Sterrett Criminal 
Justice Center or Parkland Hospital. 

2.  Officers must provide first aid and decontamination to subjects who are sprayed with OC Spray. First aid and 

general decontamination includes: 
a.  Remove the subject from the contaminated area. 
b.  Expose the subject to fresh air, face in the wind. 
c.  Flush the subject’s eyes with water, if available. 
d.  Reassure and encourage subject to remain calm. 
e.  Monitor the subject and look for positive signs of recovery: eyes opening, controlled breathing, calming of 

f. 

the subject. 
If officers do not observe these signs of recovery and believe they have a medical emergency, or they are 
provided with additional medical information such as heart or respiratory problems, officers should have an 
MICU come to the scene. 

3.  Unless  hospitalized  or  field  released,  sprayed  adult  subjects  will  be  transported  to  the  Lew  Sterrett  Justice 
Center,  unless  the  only  charge  is  Public  Intoxication.  They  will  be  examined  by  medical  personnel  prior  to 
incarceration  at  the  Lew  Sterrett  Justice  Center  or  transported  to  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital  for  further 
treatment.  Due  to  a  contractual  agreement  with  the  City,  the  Lew  Sterrett  Justice  Center  will  not  accept 
prisoners  whose  only  charge  is  Public  Intoxication,  nor  will  the  medical  staff  treat  prisoners  who  will  not  be 
booked into the Justice Center. Officers will note on the booking sheet that the prisoner has been sprayed with  
OC Spray, and will inform personnel at Lew Sterrett Justice Center or any other detention facility. 

E. 

Juveniles  who  have  been  sprayed  will  be  provided  medical  attention  by  Dallas  Fire  Rescue  (DFR)  prior  to  field 
release or arrival at the Youth Services Division. 

F.  Reporting Requirements - Officers will complete an Incident Report and provide a brief account of the OC Spray use. 
Officers will include the date, time, and location. Also, if DFR ambulance is called to the scene, officers will provide 
the  ambulance  number  and  names  of  medical  personnel  examining  the  individual.  Officers  must  report  this 
information using  the following: 

1.  Prepare an Incident Report - applicable when a Warrants Only Arrest Report is used.  (Write the incident 
report number in the Comments section of the WARRANTS ONLY Arrest Report along with the words: OC 
Spray Arrest or PepperBall System Arrest.) 

2.  A DEARS Arrest Report Narrative - applicable for all other arrests. 
3.  Prepare  an  Incident  report  whenever  a  sprayed  subject  is  field  released.  (MICU  ambulance  number  is 

required along with supervisor name/badge number authorizing the field release.) 

G.  Certain  precautions  must  be  taken  when  handling  and  transporting  prisoners  suspected  of  suffering  from  drug-

induced psychosis/excited delirium, especially if OC Spray has been applied.  (refer to G.O. 905.00). 
Initial Training 

H. 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order 
902.00 Chemical Spray and Pepperball Launcher System 

 

Revised 07/26/10  

1.    Recruit officers will receive initial training while at the Academy.  The initial training class is an eight (8) hour   

course  which  includes  exposure  to  the  chemical  spray.  Officers  completing  this  class  will  be  certified  to  carry 
and utilize the OC Spray. 

        2.      Patrol  officers  who  have  not  completed  this  training  and  wish  to  carry  the  OC  Spray,  should  contact  the   

Divisional Training Coordinator to inquire about the next available training class at the Academy.  Officers will 
not carry or utilize the OC Spray until they have completed an initial training class and are certified. 

I.  Update Training - All officers certified to carry OC Spray will receive biennial (every two years) update training. This 

training may be in the form of a Roll Call Training Bulletin or actual “hands-on” training at the Divisional level. 

902.02  PEPPERBALL LAUNCHER SYSTEM – USAGE AND PROCEDURES  

 

 
 

D. 

A.  Purpose  -  To  set  forth  the  guidelines  for  the  training,  deployment,  maintenance,  storage,  documentation  and 

decontamination procedures of the PepperBall Launcher System. 

B.  General Departmental Policy 

1.  The  Pepperball  System  is  classified  as  hard  empty  hand  control  when  used  for  area  saturation  and  is  an 

2. 

intermediate weapon when used as direct contact. 
 It is the policy of the Dallas Police Department to resolve incidents requiring law enforcement intervention in as 
humane and safe a manner as reasonably possible. To that extent, the Dallas Police Department will use non-
lethal alternatives (PepperBall system in those circumstances that provide for the safe and efficient deployment 
of less-lethal alternatives as described in this policy.) 

C.  Definitions 

1.  PepperBall  Launcher  -  a  non-lethal  force  alternative  that  utilizes  compressed  air  to  deliver  a  non-pyrotechnic 
projectile.      The  device  can  be  considered  either  a  chemical  irritant  (OC)  delivery  device  or  impact  (kinetic 
energy) weapon. 

2.  PepperBall  Projectiles  -  are  plastic  spheres  filled with  5%  Oleoresin  Capsicum  (OC)  powder  (red),  inert  liquid 
(clear), scented powder for training (purple) and dye marker (green). In addition, a solid glass breakage round is 
available. 

3.  Air Bottle - (SCUBA) Bottle of compressed air used to charge the PepperBall System. 
Initial Training Certification 
1.  All  users  of  the  PepperBall  System  will  attend  and  successfully  complete  an  approved  course  of  instruction 
including,  but  not  limited  to;  familiarity,  application,  deployment,  use  of  force,  transition  to  primary  weapon, 
maintenance,  etc.  approved  and  sanctioned  by  the  Training  Section.  A  written  exam  and  demonstration  of 
proficiency will be completed. 
In  addition,  all  users  will  complete  update  training  every  two  years  in  the  use  and  maintenance  of  the 
PepperBall System.  

2. 

E.  Saturation Deployment-Pepperball System 

1.  The departmental issued PepperBall launchers are the only PepperBall delivery system authorized to be used 
by  sworn  members  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department.  No  other  delivery  system  or  personal  launchers  will  be 
carried or used. PepperBall rounds will only be fired from departmental issued PepperBall launchers and will be 
used only in the line of duty or in approved training. Whenever possible, patrol officers will notify a supervisor 
when there is an indication by comments of call or officer's prior knowledge of a location or individual, that there 
may be a potential for conflict and the use of the PepperBall System may be a needed resource at the location.  

2.  The PepperBall System may be utilized for saturation in the following situations:  

a.  When it is unsafe for an officer to approach a subject within contact range, or, 
b.  When  higher  use  of  force  options  may  be  justified,  but  an  opportunity  exists  for  the  use  of  PepperBall 

System saturation before other options are employed. 

c.  May be used as saturation to disperse unruly  or  rioting crowds threatening unlawful property  damage or 
physical  force.    With  Pepperball  usage,  the  primary  target  area  (dealing  with  large  crowds)  will  be  the 
ground.  If ground saturation is determined not to be a viable option, or has proven to be ineffective, the 
wall, building or other fixed object behind or adjacent to a crowd may be considered as a secondary target 
area.  However,  if officers decide to fire projectiles at a wall area  or fixed object behind or adjacent to a 
crowd,  the  officers  must  ensure  that  the  projectiles  are  fired  well  above  the  heads  of  individuals  in  the 
crowd.  In saturation deployment, officers must ensure that the rounds do not make direct hit contact with 
any of the persons involved. 
Inside  a  detention-facility  (only  if  requested  by  the  agency  in  charge)  or  building,  after  ample  verbal 
warning, if an inmate or secreted person refuses to comply with a lawful order, and/or the person takes an 
aggressive  posture  (i.e.  clenched,  fists,  fight  stance,  etc.)  or  makes  aggressive  movements  toward  an 
officer or other person. 

d. 

3. 

In addition, the PepperBall System may be used for area saturation when: 
a.  Deemed necessary to effect the arrest (officer and/or citizen safety) 
b.  The use will prevent the escalation of violence of one person(s) against another or; 
c.  When its use will avoid escalation of force, or, 
d.  To stop or subdue an animal that is aggressive to any person. 

 

4.  The PepperBall System Area Saturation will not be used on subjects who are passively resisting or who are not 

posing a physical threat to persons/property to include persons fleeing the scene. 

 
 
F.  Direct Contact Hits – Pepperball System 

1.  Direct  Contact  Hits  will  be  allowed  when  a  subject  exhibits  violent  behavior  that  threatens  the  safety  of  self 
and/or others and the use of the overall PepperBall System is justified. (Note: Officers must be able to articulate 
the violent behavior and the perceived threat to self or others). The PepperBall System should never be used to 
intentionally  target  the  head,  neck,  face,  eyes,  and  spine  unless  deadly  force  is  justified.  Under  no 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order 
902.00 Chemical Spray and Pepperball Launcher System 

 

Revised 07/26/10  

circumstances will the Pepperball System be applied after resistance has ceased.  Officers need to be aware of 
changes in the levels of resistance, and coordinate their level of force accordingly. Officers will not utilize Direct 
Contact  Hits  unless  they  are  involved  in  a  situation  which  includes  Active  Aggression  towards  the  officers  or 
others.  (Active  Aggression  is  the  physical  action  of  an  assault  towards  the  officer.  This  includes  one  who 
attempts to attack, grab, punch, kick and/or wrestles with any officer or citizen.)  
Important factors to document in the report will include: 
a.  The totality of the situation- age, gender, size, fitness level, skill level of officers or subject 
b.  Number of officers/Number of subjects present 
c.  Special  Circumstances  –  close  proximity  to  a  weapon,  special  knowledge  of  the  situation,  injury  or 

2. 

exhaustion, ground position, imminent danger 

3.  Subjects  that  receive  Direct  Contact  Hits  of  pepperball  projectiles  will  receive  medical  treatment  by  medical 
personnel as outlined in General Order 902.00 (D). Officers electing to use the PepperBall System to disable a 
potentially  violent  suspect  should  do  so  with  "hard  cover"  present,  when  possible.  Hard  cover  is  at  least  one 
additional  officer  at  the  scene,  other  than  the  officer  deploying  with  the  PepperBall  System,  who  is  safely 
positioned  to  monitor  the  actions  of  the  officer  and  the  suspect,  and  is  immediately  prepared  to  respond  with 
lethal force if necessary. 

4.  The  solid  glass  breakage  round  will  not  be  used  for  direct  hits  unless  the  officer  is  confronted  with  a  deadly 

force situation where no reasonable alternatives exist. 

G.  Follow-up  Care  And  Decontamination  -  Any  time  resisting  or  combative  subjects  are  brought  under  control  and 
handcuffed,  place  them  in  an  upright  seated  position,  if  possible.  Subjects  may  be  placed  on  their  side  if  it  is 
impossible  to  keep  them  in  an  upright  position.  Officers  will  monitor  subjects  until  releasing  them  to  a  detention 
facility or medical personnel. 
1.  Handcuff  the  subject  when  it  is  tactically  safe  to  do  so.  As  soon  as  it  is  reasonably  safe  to  do  so,  check  the 
subject’s vital signs (pulse and breathing) to determine any apparent medical difficulties. Place the subject in a 
sitting  position  or  roll  the  subject  onto  his/her  side.  Do  not  place  in  a  prone  position  as  it  could  result  in 
positional asphyxia. Provide constant monitoring of the subject until after transport to the Lew Sterrett Criminal 
Justice Center or Parkland Hospital. 

2.  Subjects  that  receive  direct  contact  of  Pepperball  projectiles  will  receive  medical  treatment  by  medical 

personnel. First Aid and General Decontamination will include: 
a.  Remove the subject from the contaminated area. 
b.  Expose the subject to fresh air, face in the wind. 
c.  Flush the subject’s eyes with water, if available. 
d.  Reassure and encourage the subject to remain calm. 
e.  Monitor the subject and look for positive signs of recovery: eyes opening controlled breathing, calming of 

f. 

g. 

the subject. 
If officers do not observe these signs of recovery and believe they have a medical emergency, or they are 
provided with additional medical information such as heart or respiratory problems, officers should have an 
MICU come to the scene. 
If  the  Pepperball  System  is  utilized,  officers  should  not  allow  the  subject  to  rub  their  face.    Officers  can 
assist in decontamination by brushing residual OC powder from the subject’s clothing. Offices should use 
gloves and stand upwind from the subject to briefly brush OC powder from the subject’s clothing. 
3.  Unless hospitalized or field released, adult subjects under arrest and exposed to OC powder will be transported 
to Lew Sterrett Justice Center, unless the only charge is Public Intoxication.  They will be examined by medical 
personnel prior to incarceration at the Lew Sterrett Justice Center or transported to Parkland Memorial Hospital 
for  further  treatment.    Due  to  a  contractual  agreement  with  the  City,  the  Lew  Sterrett  Justice  Center  will  not 
accept prisoners whose only charge is Public Intoxication, nor will the medical staff treat prisoners who will not 
be booked into the Justice Center. Officers will note on the booking sheet that the prisoner has been exposed to 
OC powder and will inform personnel at Lew Sterrett Justice Center or any other detention facility. 
Juveniles who have been exposed will be provided medical attention by Dallas Fire Rescue (DFR) prior to field 
release or arrival at the Youth Services Section. 

4. 

H.  Reporting  Requirements  –  Officers  will  complete  an  Incident  Report  and  provide  a  brief  account  of  the  use  of  the 
Pepperball System. Officers will include the date, time, and location.  Also, if DFR ambulance is called to the scene, 
officers will provide the ambulance number and names of medical personnel examining the individual.  Officers will 
provide  a  detailed  description  of  the  decontamination  process,  the  number  of  projectiles  deployed,  as  well  as  any 
observed or reported injuries. Officers must report this information by using  the following: 
1.  Prepare an Incident Report – applicable when a Warrant’s Only Arrest Report is used.  (Write the incident report 
number  in  the  Comments  section  of  the  WARRANTS  ONLY  Arrest  Report  along  with  the  words:  OC  Spray 
Arrest or Pepperball System Arrest.) 

2.  A DEARS Arrest Report Narrative – applicable for all other arrests. 
3.  Prepare  an  Incident  Report  whenever  a  subject  is  being  field  released  and  the  subject  has  been  directly  or 
indirectly  exposed  to  usage  of  the  Pepperball  System.    Officers  must  include  the  supervisor  name/badge 
number that is authorizing the field release. 
In  addition  to  the  above  reporting  requirements,  officers  will  complete  the  Taser/Pepperball  Incident  Report 
Form before the end of tour of duty and forward it through the chain of command. 

4. 

I.  Considerations  

1.  Certain precautions must be taken when handling and transporting prisoners suspected of suffering from drug-
induced  psychosis/excited  delirium,  especially  if  the  Pepperball  System  was  used.    (Officers  should  refer  to 
General Order 905.00.) 

2.  Prior  to  firing  the  PepperBall  launcher,  when  possible  and  practical,  the  officer  should  give  loud  verbal 
commands  to  the  targeted  suspect  ordering  him  to  comply  with  the  officer's  instructions.  The  officer  also 
announces  to  other  officers  present  that  he  will  be  deploying  "PEPPERBALL".  This  information  helps 
communicate the officer's intentions and minimizes the likelihood of sympathetic fire from the other officers. 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order 
902.00 Chemical Spray and Pepperball Launcher System 

 

Revised 07/26/10  

3.  Sworn  members  should  remain  aware  that  the  effects  of  the  OC  powder  may  vary  between  individuals; 

therefore, they must remain alert to the possibility that other means may be necessary to subdue the offender. 

4.  When  deploying  the  PepperBall  System  to  saturate  an  area  or  when  directed  at  offenders,  officers  should 
consider environmental issues such as wind and rain and be aware of accidental contamination of other officers 
and bystanders. 

5.  Deploying  officers  must  always  be  aware  of  their  target  and  background  and  are  responsible  for  every  round 

fired. 

J.  Training 

1.  All  sworn  personnel  who  are  certified  to  carry  the  Pepperball  System  will  receive  recertification  training  and 

2. 

qualify every two years.   
This training will be monitored by a certified Pepperball System instructor and documented on the employees 
training record. 

3.  Any  employee  that  fails  proficiency  training  will  immediately  be  remediated.  If  the  employee  fails  after 
remediation, he/she will be suspended from carrying the Pepperball System until he/she successfully completes 
the proficiency training. 
It will be the responsibility of the supervisor over the Pepperball System to complete a memo to the employee’s 
chain of command documenting suspension of authorization to carry the Pepperball System. 

4. 

5.  When the employee successfully passes proficiency training, the Pepperball supervisor will document the fact in 

a memorandum to the employee’s chain of command. 

K.  Maintenance 

1.  Each Division/Unit will designate a coordinator that will be the armorer. Division/Unit coordinators will have the 

following responsibilities: 
a.  Sworn members shall not alter, adjust, or modify the Pepperball launcher in such a way as to change the 
pressure, the velocity of the rounds, or the basic design of the launcher. The addition of lights and or sights 
may  be  added  at  the  discretion  of  the  designated  Departmental  Pepperball  Training  Coordinator.    (This 
individual is designated by the Training Section). 

b.  The  Division/Unit  Coordinator  will  conduct  semi-annual  inspections  of  the  launchers  and  maintain  it  in  a 
state  of  operational  readiness.    Documentation  of  the  inspections  will  be  forwarded  to  the  Division 
Commander for review and retention. 
If the PepperBall launcher has any repair problems that cannot be taken care of at the divisional level, the 
designated Departmental PepperBall Training Coordinator will have the final authority to take the weapon 
out of service and return it to the appropriate manufacture.    

c. 

2.  Exterior  -  To  clean  the  exterior,  use  a  towel  dampened  with  water  to  wipe  off  oil  or  debris.  DO  NOT  use  any 

3. 

cleaning solvents. 
Internal 
a.  Periodically applying the supplied oil on the exposed O-ring of the air bottle and to the internal O-ring of 

the bolt will keep the system operating efficiently. 

b.  To lubricate the launcher, use a few drops of lubricating oil on the front bolt, rear bolt O-ring, linkage arm 

and bottle O-ring. 

4.  Air Bottle 

a.  Officers utilizing the Pepperball System will visibly inspect the air bottle pressure at the start of the shift to 

b. 

ensure proper pressure. 
If the air bottle pressure is less than 750 pounds of pressure, the officer who the system is assigned will re-
pressurize the air bottle to its maximum pressure immediately. 

c.  As with any high-pressure system, caution must be exercised to prevent a hazardous situation. The High 
Pressure Air Tanks for refilling bottles to power the SA200 will be kept in a secure location. Everyone who 
has  attended  the  PepperBall  Certification  course  will  be  qualified  to  charge  his/her  own  bottle,  but  for 
increased safety, will wear the provided safety glasses when recharging. 

d.  NOTE: Before doing any cleaning or maintenance, remove the air bottle from the launcher system. SCUBA 
tanks are required to be visually inspected each year, and hydrostatically tested every five (5) years. Each 
SCUBA tank should have a label that determines the inspection schedule for the tank. 

a.  PepperBall launchers are issued to qualified officers at the beginning of each duty shift. The launchers and 
ammunition should be inspected prior to being secured in the police vehicle. PepperBall launchers should 
be  stored  in  a  protective  case  and  secured  in  a  police  vehicle  when  checked  out  by  a  qualified  officer. 
PepperBall  launchers  should  be  stored  in  a  protective  case  in  a  secured  area  when  not  checked  out  for 
use. 

5.  Storage 

                                b.     When checked out by an officer for patrol use, the PepperBall launchers should be stored with the bolt 
forward, magazine tube or hopper empty, and the safety "on". PepperBall launchers should be loaded, 
used, and rendered safe in accordance with the procedures outlined in the PepperBall training course.  

 

Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

903.00 Use of Restraining Holds 

DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 01/30/07 

 
903.00  USE OF RESTRAINING HOLDS  

903.01  Team Take-Down Contact Control 

 

 
A. 

If there are multiple officers at the scene, the Team Take-Down method is an effective restraining hold for controlling 
violent subjects. 

B.  This restraining hold consists of each officer controlling one limb of the subject with the officer's body weight, until the 

subject can be handcuffed.  A fifth officer can immobilize the subject's head, if necessary, to prevent injury. 
C.  Follow-up Care - Officers are responsible for rendering first aid to injured subjects (refer to Section 901.01 D).  
D. 

In the Arrest Report narrative, the arresting officers will document the use of the Team Take-Down Contact Control. 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

904.00 Impact Weapons 

DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 01/06/09 

 
904.00 
 

IMPACT WEAPONS  

A. 

Impact  weapons  are  categorized  as  Intermediate  Weapons.    The  use  of  impact  weapons  is  justified  for  situations 
when the officer believes empty hand control is ineffective or inappropriate. 

B.  The use of intermediate weapons is categorized as: 

1.  Soft Intermediate Weapon Control:  Impact weapon, joint locks, come-a-longs and blocks. 
2.  PepperBall System – Direct Contact Procedures for training and deployment are outlined in Patrol SOP 1937. 
3.  Hard Intermediate Weapon Control:  Impact weapon strikes, jabs, and chops. 

C.  All uniformed officers and other designated personnel are required to carry departmentally authorized batons (refer 
to G.O.  802.22).  Officers and designated personnel must successfully complete  a departmental training course in 
the use of the baton.   

D.  Officers may carry any departmentally authorized baton after completing the required training course and maintaining 

certification. 

E.  Officers will not carry knuckles, slappers, or blackjacks. 
F.  Flashlights are not designed as impact weapons and normally will not be used as a self-defense tool.    
G.  Officers are responsible for rendering first aid to injured subjects (refer to G.O. 901.01 D). 

 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

905.00 Drug Induced Psychosis/Excited Delirium 
DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 03/12/2014 

905.00 

HANDLING  SUSPECTS  EXHIBITING  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUG-INDUCED  PSYCHOSIS/EXCITED  DELIRIUM,  OR  A 
PSYCHOTIC EPISODE  

Individuals who are suffering from drug-induced psychosis/excited delirium often exhibit these types of behavior: 
1.  Hallucinations 
2.  Sensitivity to light 
3.  Paranoia 
4.  Delusions of persecution 
5.  Unusually great strength 
6.  Aggression toward objects 
7.  Extremely high body temperature (Hyperthermia) 
8.  Dilated pupils 
9.  Undressing in public 
10.  Hiding behind bushes, trees, or cars 
11.  High blood pressure 
12.  High pulse rate 
13.  Seizures 
14.  Thrashing after restraint 
15.  Jumping into water 
16.  Self-inflicted injury 

C. 

B.  Subjects suffering from this disorder may collapse and die without warning, and are subject to medical distress within 
an hour after being restrained.  Subjects will be placed in an upright position (if possible) or on their side as soon as 
they are brought under control. 
Immediately upon recognition by responding officers that a subject is in a state of excited delirium, officers will advise 
dispatch of the condition and request Dallas Fire Rescue, a supervisor, and additional cover elements. Officers will 
treat the arrest of a subject as a medical emergency. Officers will not delay the transport of a subject while waiting for 
supervisory  approval.  The subject  will  be  transported  to  a medical facility  by  Dallas  Fire  Rescue  ambulance. In  all 
instances, an officer will ride in the rear of the ambulance to the medical facility with the subject. Persons believed to 
be suffering from drug-induced psychosis/ excited delirium will be continuously monitored by police personnel.  Such 
subjects are not to be left unattended at any time. Supervisors will respond to the call location or will meet the officer 
and subject at the medical facility where the subject is transported. 

D.  All actions taken to subdue a subject believed to be suffering from drug-induced psychosis/excited delirium will be 
thoroughly documented in all offense/incident and arrest reports.  Officers will also document their observations of 
the subject’s condition, which Dallas Fire Rescue ambulance transported the subject, and where medical treatment 
was received. 
If  a  subject  that  has  been  physically  restrained,  handcuffed  or  taken  into  custody  and  is  transported  to  a  medical 
facility  after  experiencing  a  medical  emergency,  the  arresting  or  transporting  officers  will  notify  the  on-call  Special 
Investigation Unit (SIU) supervisor. 

E. 

 

 

 

 

A. 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

906.00 Use of Deadly Force 

DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 06/19/09  

 
906.00  USE OF DEADLY FORCE 
 
906.01  Philosophy 
 

 
906.02   Use of Deadly Force Policy 
 

B.  Definitions 

A.  This philosophy is intended as a broad guide to the use of deadly force and as a moral and ethical approach to the 
use  of  deadly  force  policy.    Although  not  intended  as  a  strictly  enforced  set  of  rules,  the  philosophy  statement 
describes the manner in which the procedures will be applied.   

B.  Protection of human life is a primary goal of the Police Department; therefore, police officers have a responsibility to 

use only the degree of force necessary to protect and preserve life. 

C.  Deadly force will be used with great restraint and as a last resort only when the level of resistance warrants the use 
of  deadly  force.    The  Dallas  Police  Department  places  a  greater  value  on  human  life  than  on  the  protection  of 
property; therefore, the use of deadly force is not allowed to protect property interests. 

A. 

Justification for the Use of Deadly Force -In all situations, justification for the use of deadly force must be limited to 
the facts reasonably apparent to the officer at the time the officer decides to use the force. 

1.  Reasonably Perceive - The facts or circumstances the employee knows, or should know, that would cause an 

ordinary and prudent peace officer to act or think in a similar way under similar circumstances. 

2.  Reasonable Alternative - An action that may be taken by the officer that may allow the officer to avoid the use of 

3.  Reasonable Belief - A belief that would be held by an ordinary and prudent person in the same circumstances 

deadly force. 

as the actor.  

4.  Serious Bodily Injury - Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death, serious permanent disfigurement, or 

protracted loss of impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 

C.  Avoiding the Use of Deadly Force 

1.  At  the  point  when  an  officer  should  reasonably  perceive  the  potential  exists  that  deadly  force  may  be  an 
outcome  of  any  situation,  the  officer  must  use  reasonable  alternatives  if  time  and  opportunities  permit.  The 
reasonableness of the action is based upon the time available, the opportunity of performing the action, and the 
facts apparent to the officer prior to and during the incident. 

2.  Planned and supervised hazardous entry situations are recognized as meeting the requirements of reasonable 

alternatives above. 

3.  Officers will not fire their weapons under conditions that would unnecessarily subject bystanders or hostages to 

death or possible injury except to preserve life or to prevent serious bodily injury. 

D.  Authorization to Use Deadly Force -Officers will only use deadly force to protect themselves or another person from 

imminent death or serious bodily injury. 

E.  Drawing or Displaying Firearms - Officers may draw or display firearms when there is a threat or reasonable belief 

that there is a threat to life or they have a reasonable fear for their own safety and/or the safety of others. 

F.  Discharging Firearms at Moving Vehicles - 

1.  Discharging  firearms  at  a  moving  or  fleeing  vehicle  is  prohibited  unless  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  imminent 

death or serious bodily injury to the officer or another person. 

2.  Officers will not voluntarily place themselves in a position in front of an oncoming vehicle where deadly force is 

a probable outcome. 

vehicle. 

3.  When  confronting  an  oncoming  vehicle,  officers  will  move  out  of  its  path,  if  possible,  rather  than  fire  at  the 

G.  Officers will not fire warning shots. 
H.  Policy  Restrictions  -  The  restrictions  of  this  policy  shall  not  apply  if  an  off-duty  officer  acts  within  the  provisions  of 
current  state  statutes  to  protect  the  employee's  personal  property.    In  this  case  the  officer  is  acting  as  a  private 
citizen. 

 

 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order 

                 907.00 Electronic Control Weapon 

 

DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 
                                                                                                                                                   Revised 6/03/2015 

 
907.00  ELECTRONIC CONTROL WEAPON 
 
907.01  Definitions 
 

 

907.02  General Departmental Policy 
 

A.  Electronic Control Weapon (ECW) – a less than lethal force alternative that utilizes compressed nitrogen to shoot two 
small  probes  up  to  21  feet.    The  probes  are  connected  to  the  weapon  by  high  voltage  insulated  wires.    Electrical 
pulses are then transmitted along the wires into the target.  

B.  Air Cartridge – uses a non-flammable nitrogen propellant. The probes and wires are contained within the cartridge.  

Each cartridge is marked with an individual serial number. 

C.  Digital Power Magazine (DPM) – a custom lithium energy cell power supply system for the ECW. 
D.  ECW  Coordinator  –  Divisional  employee  responsible  for  the  distribution,  upkeep,  functionality  and  auditing  of  the 

E. 

ECW assigned to their Division. 
(Anti-Felon  Identification):    Every  time  an  Air  Cartridge  is  fired,  it  disperses  20-30  identification  tags called  AFIDs.  
These tags are printed with the serial number of the cartridge and can be used to determine who fired the cartridge.  
F.  Reasonable Person Standard – Facts or circumstances the employee knows, or should know, are such as to cause 
an ordinary and prudent peace officer to act or think in a similar way under similar circumstances.  “Reasonableness” 
is subject to review and determination by the chain of command.  

A. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  to  resolve  incidents  requiring  law  enforcement  intervention  in  as 
humane and safe a manner as reasonably possible. 

B.  To that extent, the Dallas Police Department will use less than lethal alternatives (ECWs) in those circumstances that 

provide for the safe and efficient deployment of less lethal alternatives as described in this policy. 

C.  The  ECW  is  a  less  than  lethal  weapon  system  that  delivers  electrical  energy  and  is  designed  for  the  purpose  of 

subduing persons who are actively resisting arrest without causing serious injury or death. 

D.  The ECW may be used in the following instances: (1) subjects who aggressively assault the officer in a less 
than deadly force manner (Active Aggression); and (2) subjects who threaten or attack an officer (or another) 
with force, which the officer believes could result in serious injury. 

E.  Officers need to be aware of changes in the levels of resistance, and coordinate their level of force accordingly.  All 

uses of force must be justified and all pertinent information should be documented including such possible factors as:   
1.  The severity of the crime 
2.  Whether the suspect poses an immediate threat to the safety of themselves or others. 
3.  Does the suspect have a history of violent behavior? 

F.  The deployment of the ECW may be done in arrest situations involving Defensive Resistance. 
G.  Officers may draw or display with an arch their ECW when there is a threat or reasonable belief that there is a threat 
of Active Aggression.  This means the officer may draw or display the ECW at a lesser level if the suspect’s actions, 
or  words,  reasonably  lead  the  officer  to  believe  that  the  situation  is  likely  to  escalate  to  the  Defensive  Resistance 
level.  If an arch display is used but there is no actual deployment of a cartridge, the officer is required to complete a 
ECW (TASER X26) Incident Report and should notify a supervisor.  An arch display is performed by removing the 
live cartridge and pulling the trigger to display the electrical arch, with the intent that seeing the arch will gain suspect 
compliance.  The arch display does not make contact with the suspect.  

 

907.03  Authorization and Training 
 

A.  The departmental issued Taser X26 is the only ECW authorized to be used by trained and certified sworn members 
of  the  Dallas  Police  Department.  No  other  ECW  will  be  carried  or  used.    Officers  certified  to  use  a  ECW  may 
purchase  the  TASER  X26  Law  Enforcement  model  from  TASER  International  to  carry  during  their  shift.    Certified 
ECW users are required to use only Departmental issued cartridges and must surrender their ECW upon request for 
data  downloads.    Approved  ECWs  will  only  be  used  in  the  line  of  duty  or  in  approved  training  with  a  certified 
instructor present.  

B.  All  users  of  the  ECW  will  attend  an  initial  eight  hour  course  of  instruction  including,  but  not  limited  to  familiarity, 
application,  deployment  (physical  competency),  use  of  force,  transition  to  primary  weapon  and  maintenance 
approved  and  sanctioned  by  the  Training  Section.    Initial  instruction  will  also  include  successful  completion  of  a 
written examination and demonstration of proficiency with retention skills.  Officers will not be allowed to carry or use 
a ECW without successfully completing the initial eight hour course of instruction, including the physical competency 
exam. 

C.  To maintain certification, all users will be re-qualified in the use of the ECW every year at the divisional level.  Failure 
to successfully complete re-qualification at the divisional level would require an officer to attend another eight hour 
certification course in order to become certified again. 

D.  The divisional  ECW coordinator will make a copy of all re-qualification rosters at the divisional level to keep on file 
for each division.  The ECW coordinator will then forward the original re-certification rosters to the In-Service section 
at the academy. 

E.  Officers who are certified to use the ECW and have been issued an ECW will be required to carry the ECW while on 
duty . ECWs will also be available for check out to certified users at the divisional level Sergeants should ensure that 
only those officers who have successfully completed the ECW certification course are issued a ECW. 

F.  Supervisors  assigned to  a Patrol Division should  attend the ECW certification course  and  will  carry a  ECW  during 

their tour of duty. 

 
 

 

 

 
907.04  Use and Deployment 

Dallas Police Department General Order 
907.00 Electronic Control Weapon 

 

Revised 6/03/2015   

A.  Officers will notify a supervisor, if time allows, when there is an indication by comments of the call or officer’s prior 
knowledge  of  a  location  or  individual,  that  there  may  be  a  potential  for  conflict  and  the  use  of  a  ECW  may  be  a 
needed resource at the location. 

B.  A  reasonable  person  standard  will  be  applied  when  controlling  a  suspect  through  the  use  of  ECW  force.    While 
control of a suspect through advice, warning, or persuasion is preferable, the use of a ECW is sometimes necessary. 
1.  Use of a ECW is justified : 

a.  To control a physically resisting suspect displaying Defensive Resistance. 
b.  To defend an officer or another person from an Actively Aggressive subject. 
c.  To protect a person from seriously injuring themselves. 
d.  To stop or subdue an animal that is aggressive to any person. 
e.  When lesser levels of control are ineffective. 

2.  Cautious  Subjects:  Unless  there are  compelling  reasons  that can be  clearly  articulated,  ECWs should  not  be 

used on:  
a.  Handcuffed Prisoners 
b.  Pregnant Women 
c.  Elderly 
d. 

Juveniles - The deployment of a ECW on such individuals should only be done in extreme circumstances 
where based upon the situation that the officer encounters no other less or equal levels of control may be 
reasonably applied or have proven ineffective, and the continued actions of the suspect place the officer, 
suspect, or another person in imminent danger of serious injury or death. 

3. 

Length and number of exposures: The number of ECW cycles and the length of each cycle should be based 
upon the immediate threat of the suspect’s actions.  Whenever additional cycles are given, or any cycle is given 
for longer than the standard five (5) seconds, the officer must further explain the intensity of the circumstances 
that would justify such an exposure. Maximum exposure should be no more than fifteen (15) seconds, total. 

4.  Under no circumstances will any ECW be deployed after resistance has ceased.  
5.  ECWs WILL NOT be used on subjects who are using techniques of passive resistance, or subjects who are not 

posing a physical threat to persons or property. 
6.  ECWs WILL NOT be used for any of the following: 

Individuals operating a moving motor vehicle. 

a.  Coercion of any type. 
b.  Escorting or prodding individuals. 
c.  Waking unconscious or intoxicated individuals. 
d. 
e.  Handcuffed prisoners who are not physically resisting. 
f.  When the subject has come in contact with flammable liquids or is in a flammable atmosphere. 
g.  When the subject is in an elevated position where a fall may cause serious injury or death. 
h.  Horseplay or practical jokes. 
Subjects in deep water. 
i. 
In conjunction with alcohol-based OC spray. 
j. 

7.  Anytime a ECW is deployed by an officer, with the exception of a controlled function check, a supervisor will be 

notified and will respond to the scene. 

C.  ECWs should never be used to intentionally target the head, neck, face, eyes, spine, or groin unless deadly force is 

justified.  Certified ECW users should aim at lower center mass. 

D.  Certified ECW users should be cognizant that other agencies or citizens may at any point introduce the use of an 

alcohol based OC spray. 

same subject at the same time. 

E.  Two or more certified ECW users will not intentionally deploy their conducted energy devices simultaneously at the 

F.  Once  a  ECW  has  been  deployed,  the  user  is  required  to  notify  a  supervisor.    The  supervisor  will  respond  to  the 

location and follow General Order 317.00 procedures in any serious injury or death incidental to ECW usage. 

A.  Certified ECW users electing to use a ECW to disable a potentially violent suspect should do so with “hard cover” 
present, when possible.  “Hard cover” is at least one additional officer at the scene, other than the officer deploying 
the ECW, who is safely positioned to monitor the actions of the officer and the suspect, and is immediately prepared 
to respond with deadly force if necessary. 

B.  Certified ECW  users  deploying  a ECW  will  announce  deployment of  the  device to  prevent  contagious fire  to  other 
officers.    Certified  officers  will  also  provide  loud  verbal  commands  to  the  subject,  when  possible  and  practical, 
ordering him/her to comply with the officer’s instructions. As a standard practice prior to deploying the ECW, certified 
officers shall announce the words “TASER, TASER” to alert others of the impending use of the weapon. 

C.  All officers should be aware that the reaction to the electrical impulses varies from subject to subject and may not 

establish control. 

D.  Certified ECW users should be aware of and assess the background, surroundings and their location, as well as the 

subjects, before deploying a conducted energy device.   

E.  DO NOT fire the Taser X26 weapon or any other ECW near flammable liquids and fumes. A ECW such as the Taser 
X26  weapon  can  ignite  gasoline  or  other  flammables.  Some  self-defense  OC  sprays  use  flammable  carriers  like 
alcohol and could be dangerous to the arrested person and the officers to use in immediate conjunction with a ECW. 
F.  The  Taser  X26  weapon  is  equipped  with  a  “Drive–Stun”  backup  capability.  The  use  of  the  “Drive-Stun”  backup 
weapon is authorized only if the use of the Taser X26 weapon is justified. The “Drive-Stun” should only be used with 
the cartridge in place and only in extenuating circumstances, i.e., completing the circuit. Target areas for the use of 
the “Drive-Stun”  will include muscle or nerve points on the front, back, side, legs, and arms (radial nerve, brachial 
plexus tie-in, common peroneal, etc.) 

 
907.05  Tactical Considerations 
 

Dallas Police Department General Order 
907.00 Electronic Control Weapon 

 

Revised 6/03/2015   

G.  Employees shall not alter, adjust, or modify the Taser X26 weapon or any other departmental approved ECW in such 

a way as to change the pressure, the velocity of the probes, or the basic design of the weapon. 

H.  When  a  suspect  takes  an  officer’s  ECW  or  the  suspect  is  armed  with  their  own  ECW  and  attacks  or  threatens  to 
attack an officer, the officer may defend themselves to avoid becoming incapacitated and risking the possible loss of 
their firearm.  When possible, officers should attempt to move outside the ECW’s range and seek cover as well as 
back away to mitigate the danger. 

 

 

 
907.06  Follow Up Care 
 

Any  time  resisting  or  combative  subjects  are  brought  under  control  and  handcuffed,  place  them  in  an  upright  seated 
position, if possible. Subjects may be placed on their side if it is impossible to keep them in an upright position. Officers 
will monitor subjects until releasing them to a detention facility or medical personnel. 
A.  Handcuff the subject when it is tactically safe to do so. As soon as it is reasonably safe to do so, check the subject’s 
vital signs (pulse and breathing) to determine any apparent medical difficulties. Place the subject in a sitting position 
or roll the subject onto his/her side.  Do not place in a prone position as it could result in positional asphyxia. Provide 
constant monitoring of the subject until release to a detention facility or medical personnel. 

B.  Subjects that are subjected to a ECW will receive medical treatment. First aid includes:  

1.  ECW certified officers will use latex gloves and will carefully remove the probes from the subject. 
2.  Probe wounds will be wiped with an alcohol swab. 
3.  Reassure and encourage subject to remain calm. 
4.  Monitor the subject and look for signs of recovery: controlled breathing, calming of the subject. 
5. 

If the officers do not observe these signs of recovery and believe they have a medical emergency, or they are 
provided with additional medical information such as heart or respiratory problems, officers should immediately 
have an MICU respond to the scene. 

6.  ECW  probes  shall  be  removed  as  soon  as  possible.    ECW  probes  that  are  imbedded  in  a  subject’s  skin  (as 
opposed  to  just  clothing),  shall  only  be  removed  by  certified  ECW  users,  Fire  Rescue  personnel,  or  other 
medical  personnel.    Officers,  including  certified  ECW  users  shall  not  remove  probes  that  are  embedded  in  a 
subject’s  head,  throat,  groin,  female  breast  area,  or  any  other  sensitive  area.    Fire  Rescue  or  other  medical 
personnel  will  remove  these  probes.    Probes  that  have  penetrated  a  person’s  skin  shall  be  considered  a 
biological hazard and shall be handled with the appropriate care. 

C.  Adults subjected to a ECW will be seen by MICU if the subject shows no sign of recovery and then transported to a 
medical  facility  for  further  treatment  if  necessary.    Adults  subjected  to  a  ECW  may  be  transported  directly  to  Lew 
Sterrett  Justice  Center  and  an  examination  by  medical  personnel  at  Lew  Sterrett  will  be  requested  prior  to  being 
booked in.  Due to a contractual agreement with the City, the Lew Sterrett Justice Center will not accept prisoners 
whose  only  charge  is  Public  Intoxication,  nor  will  the  medical  staff  treat  prisoners  who  will  not  be  booked  into  the 
Justice Center.  Adults charged with Public Intoxication may be seen by an MICU before being taken to Detox.  Lew 
Sterrett Justice Center and Detox personnel will be advised that the prisoner being booked has been subjected to a 
ECW.  This information will also be noted in the booking sheet by the transporting officer. 

D.  Juveniles who have been subjected to a ECW will be provided medical attention by MICU prior to arrival at the Youth 

Services Section. 

 
907.07  Reporting and Administrative Requirements Regarding the Use of the ECW 
 

A.  Certified ECW users will articulate an account of all ECW deployments and provide a brief account of the ECW used 
(including  the ECW’s serial  number  and  the  spent cartridge  serial number).   The  officer  will  also  include  the  date, 
time, location, the name of the medical personnel examining the individual, and if applicable, the MICU ambulance 
number.  If  a  ECW  is  deployed,  officers  will  also  give  a  detailed  description  of  number  of  shots  fired,  number  and 
length  of  energy  bursts,  as  well  as  any  observed  or  reported  injuries.  In ALL situations  where  a  ECW is  deployed 
(cartridge  fired,  drive  stun,  or  arch  display)  ,  a  ECW  (Taser  X26)  Use  Form  must  be  completed  and  forwarded 
through the officer’s chain of command.  Officers must report this information using one of the following: 
1.  A DEARS Arrest Report Narrative  
2.  A  handwritten  or  MDT  generated  Injured  Person/ ECW Offense  Report  will  be  prepared  when  circumstances 

dictate that a DEARS Arrest Report will not be prepared. 

3.  First-line supervisor shall be notified in all instances wherein the ECW has been utilized.  The supervisor shall 
respond to the scene and conduct an inquiry into the incident.  This inquiry shall include, but not be limited to, a 
review of the evidence, interviews of witnesses, and an interview of the subject.  The supervisor shall also notify 
a watch commander or acting watch commander of the incident and ensure that a ECW (Taser X26) Use Form 
is completed. 
In all situations where a cartridge is deployed or a suspect is “drive stunned” with the ECW, the ECW (TASER 
X26) Use Form will be completed before the end of tour of duty, and forwarded through the chain of command 
to the Bureau Commander.  The ECW (TASER X26) Use Form may be obtained from the ECW Coordinator at 
each Division.  

4. 

5.  The supervisor will ensure that all necessary physical evidence is gathered, processed and stored according to 
Property Section S.O.P.  Evidence will include the spent cartridge, and probes. AFIDS tags may be retrieved at 
the discretion of a supervisor or the Physical Evidence Section.  If an arrest report is completed, all of the ECW 
information  should  be  placed  in the  officer’s comments  section  of the  arrest  report.   The  arrest  report  charge 
should be placed in the “offense” space of the property tag.  

B.  Data Downloads 

1.  Each time a ECW is deployed; the ECW Coordinator will download the data of the ECW used and print the data 
download report.  This report should be forwarded with the ECW (TASER X26) Use Form through the division’s 
chain of command. 

2.  Semi-Annual audits of each ECW will be conducted by the ECW Coordinator for each Division. To monitor data 

properly, ECW Coordinators may need to download the ECW data weekly. 

3.  The audit will then be forwarded for review to the Bureau Commander.  

Dallas Police Department General Order 
907.00 Electronic Control Weapon 

 

Revised 6/03/2015   

C.  Each Division Commander will designate a ECW Coordinator who is a sworn employee that will conduct semi-annual 
inspections of all ECWs assigned to their respective division.  If the designee has any repair problems that cannot be 
taken care of at the divisional level, the Quartermaster Unit will have final authority to take the weapon out of service 
and return it to the appropriate manufacturer. 

 
907.08  Accidental Discharges 
 

A.  Officers will be held accountable for every trigger pull of the ECW. 
B. 

If  an  accidental  discharge  occurs,  a  supervisor  will  be  called  to  respond  to  the  scene.    A  divisional  review  of  the 
incident  will  be  conducted  for  all discharges  where  there  was  no  contact made  or  if  there  were  no  injuries.    If  the 
discharge results in serious bodily injury or death to any person or the field supervisor determines there has been a 
gross violation of policy, Internal Affairs Division will be called to respond to the scene. 
If an accidental discharge occurs and a person is struck, the officer must prepare a “Injured Person/ECW” offense 
report and the property tag will contain this offense title in the appropriate space.  A Damaged Property Report will 
also be prepared. 
If an accidental discharge occurs and no one is struck, the officer must prepare a “Damaged Property Report” and 
the ECW Coordinator should take a completed copy of the ECW (Taser X26) Use Form to the Quartermaster for a 
new cartridge.  (Record cartridge number and dispose spent cartridge). 
In any accidental discharge, a Damaged Property Report must be completed as well as a Division Recommendation 
for accountability report. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

 
907.09  Storage and Other Precautions 
 

A.  A ECW and two cartridges are issued to certified ECW users at  the beginning of each duty shift.  The ECW should 
be inspected and a function check should be done prior to being secured on the officer’s duty belt.  The ECW will be 
carried on the certified user’s duty belt and shall never be left unsecured.  The ECW will be stored in its designated 
holster.  This will protect the weapon, and will prevent accidental discharges.  ECWs are stored in their designated 
holsters in a secured area when not checked out for use. 

B.  ECWs should be loaded, used, and rendered safe in accordance with the procedures outlined in the ECW training 

course. 
If an officer checked out a departmental ECW, the weapon will be turned in at the end of each duty shift. 

C. 
D.  Divisional  ECW  Coordinators  will  be  responsible  for  ordering  extra  cartridges  and  batteries  through  the 
Quartermaster  and  will  also  be  responsible  for  replacing  ECWs  that  are  inoperable  or  taken  due  to  an  internal 
investigation. 

E.  Each Division will maintain a log on each department-issued ECW which will contain the model and serial number of 
the ECW, the officer’ name and serial number to whom the ECW is assigned, the serial numbers of the cartridges 
assigned to each officer, the reason the new cartridge was issued (i.e. training, defective, use of force incident) and 
the Service Number of the incident report if the cartridge was fired during an arrest incident 

F.  Departmental issued ECWs may be issued for off-duty use at the discretion of the Division Commander. 

 

 

 

Dallas Police Department General Order   

 

 

908.00 Response to Resistance Reporting 
DAVID O. BROWN 
CHIEF OF POLICE 

Revised 05/02/2014 

 
908.00  RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE REPORTING   
 

  908.01     Philosophy 
 

The  intent  of  Response  to  Resistance  reporting  is  to  establish  a  reporting  system  within  the  Department  for  effective 
review  and  analysis.    The  system  will  help  identify  trends,  improve  training  and  employee  safety,  and  provide  timely 
information for the Department addressing Response to Resistance issues with the public.  Early and accurate reporting 
helps  establish  Departmental  credibility.    Immediate  and  thorough  documentation  of  any  Response  to  Resistance  will 
possibly protect the officer and Department from future liabilities associated with the Response to Resistance. 
 

  908.02  General Departmental Policy 

The completion of a Response to Resistance web entry will be required in the following instances:  
 
Any Response to Resistance that is Soft Empty Hand Control or above on the Response Continuum, with the exception of 
“Compliant Handcuffing” only.  This will include, but not be limited to the following: 
 

1.  All take-downs, pressure points, joint locks 
2.  Any use of Oleoresin Capsicum Chemical Spray. 
3.  Any deployment of the Pepperball System. 
4.  Personal weapons such as hands and feet. 
5.  Any use of the baton or any other type of instrument that is used as an impact weapon. 
6.  Any use of an Electronic Control Weapon (Taser). This includes accidental discharges of the Taser. 
7.  The deployment of a firearm which is pointed directly at any individual.  This will NOT include when any firearm 

is deployed as part of a warrant process or felony stop. 
 
Note:    A  firearm  discharge  will  not  be  reported  in  this  system.    A  firearm  discharge  will  be  investigated  by 
CAPERS and Internal Affairs. 

908.03  Response to Resistance Entry (BlueTeam) 
 

A.  Officers  will  conduct  the  initial  investigation  and make  any  necessary  report  immediately  after completing  the 

initial investigation. 

password.  

B.  Officers  will  enter  the  BlueTeam  reporting  system  via  the  Intranet  and  enter  their  network  user  name  and 

C.  Each officer that uses force during an incident will enter the system and document their use of force separately 
and write their own narrative. (The only exception to this will be Firearm Display where one officer may do the 
report for multiple officers if the only use of force is a Firearm Display.) 

D.  Officers will access the Response to Resistance Report (Use of Force) and enter the incident completely. 
E.  After completion,  the  officer  will  forward  the  Response  to  Resistance  report  via  BlueTeam  to their  immediate 

supervisor for review. 

F.  The immediate supervisor will review the form for completeness and accuracy and either return it to the officer 

for corrections or if “Approved,” forward it to the next level of supervision via BlueTeam.   

G.  After  approval  by  the  Division  Commander,  the  form  and  all  attachments  will  be  forwarded  to  the  BlueTeam 

Program administrator for release into the database. 

H.  Officers  who  do  not  have  access  to  a  Mobil  Data  Computer  (MDC)  or  an  MDC-enabled  desktop  workstation 
may call their reports into Direct Entry. This is intended to apply only to those officers who are working off-duty 
employment  or  are  in  an  assignment  where  they  have  not  been  furnished  an  MDC  or  a  network  enabled 
computer. 

 

 

908.04      Response to Resistance Statistical Review and Reports 
 

A yearly analysis of all Response to Resistance reports will be conducted and provided for inclusion in an Annual Report 
to the Chief of Police. 

 

 

 
 

                         Linear Use-of-Force Response Continuum 

 

 

DALLAS POLICE DEPARTMENT 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
Officer's Response 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
Officer Presence/ 
Verbal Direction 
Psychological  
Intimidation & 
Resistive Dialogue 
 
 
 
 

 
Soft Empty 
Hand Control 
Passive 
Resistance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
Intermediate 
Weapons 
Baton, OC, P-Ball, & 
ECW  
 
Hard Empty  Active 
Hand Control  Aggression 
OC,P-Ball, & 
ECW 
Defensive 
Resistance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Subject's Behavior 

  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Deadly 
 
Force               
Aggravated   

Aggression   
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

