Indianapolis Metropolitan 
Police Department 

 

 

GENERAL ORDER 

1.30 
 

 

 
 

USE OF FORCE  
 

POLICY 
 
This policy provides Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department (IMPD) officers with guidelines for the 
reasonable use of force.  The department considers the use of force in most instances to be defensive in 
nature and to be used only when necessary and justified to accomplish lawful objectives.   All officers shall 
exercise good judgment at all times when the use of force is necessary.   
 
 
PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
 
The use of force by law enforcement is a matter of critical concern for the public.  Although it is recognized 
that some individuals will not comply with the law or submit to lawful control unless compelled to do so by 
the use of force, the amount and type of force used shall be reasonable in all situations.    
 
While there is no way to specify the exact amount or type of reasonable force to be applied in all situations, 
each officer is expected to make such decisions in a professional and impartial manner.  It is the policy of 
the department that officers shall use only that amount of force that is reasonable, given the facts and 
circumstances known by the officer at the time of the event. 
 
While  it  is  the  ultimate  objective  of  every  law  enforcement  encounter  to  minimize  injury  to  everyone 
involved, nothing in this policy requires an officer to sustain physical injury before applying reasonable 
force.  
 
IMPD officers are approved to carry a department-authorized firearm and other authorized weapons in 
accordance with their assigned duties.  Officers shall adhere to all department policies, procedures, rules, 
regulations and directives regarding the carrying, use and care of those firearms and weapons.  Officers 
shall at all times handle and carry any firearm/weapon with due consideration for others and themselves 
(refer to G.O. 1.31 Officer Involved Shootings, G.O. 1.32 Firearms Review Board, G.O. 1.33 Electronic 
Control Devices and G.O. 1.34 Control Devices for additional information).   
 
Officers are required to immediately report all violations of department policies, procedures, rules and 
regulations and directives regarding the use of force by another officer to a supervisor.  
 
 
LEGAL ISSUES  
 
This policy recognizes that the use of force by law enforcement requires constant evaluation.  Even at the 
lowest level, the use of force is a serious responsibility and subject to legal scrutiny by the courts. The 
reasonableness inquiry in an excessive force case is an objective one.  The issue in question is whether 
the officer’s actions are objectively reasonable in light of the facts and circumstances at that moment in 
time, without regard to any underlying intent or motivation.  
 
Officers shall be aware of the possibility that a person’s lack of compliance may not always be a deliberate 
attempt to resist.  Notwithstanding the added limitations of time constraints and other factors during rapidly 
evolving  circumstances,  officers  should  balance  all  available  information  with  the  known  facts  of  the 
incident when deciding the most appropriate option for a safe resolution.  
 

 
WILLIAM D. LORAH 

CHIEF OF POLICE 
 

 
Supersedes IMPD General Orders 
1.3 and 1.14, Effective 2007  

 
Effective:  JULY 6, 2012 

Page 1 of 8 

 

1.30 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

 
 
STATE STATUTES  
 
IC 35-41-3-2 states in part: Use of force to protect person or property; 
 
(a) A person is justified in using reasonable force against another person to protect the person or a third 
person from what the person reasonably believes to be the imminent use of unlawful force.  However a 
person:  (1)  is  justified  in  using  deadly  force;  and  (2)  does  not  have  a  duty  to  retreat;  if  the  person 
reasonably believes that that force is necessary to prevent serious bodily injury to the person or a third 
person or the commission of a forcible felony.  No person in this state shall be placed in legal jeopardy of 
any kind whatsoever for protecting the person or a third person by reasonable means necessary. 
 
IC 35-41-3-3 states in part: Use of force relating to arrest or escape; 
 
(b)  A law enforcement officer is justified in using reasonable force if the officer reasonably believes that the 
force is necessary to affect a lawful arrest.  However an officer is justified in using deadly force only if the 
officer:  (1)  Has  probable  cause  to  believe  that  that  deadly  force  is  necessary:  (A)  To  prevent  the 
commission of a forcible felony; or (B) To effect an arrest of a person who the officer has probable cause to 
believe poses a threat of serious bodily injury to the officer or a third person; and (2) Has given a warning, if 
feasible, to the person against whom the deadly force is to be used. (c) A law enforcement officer making 
an arrest under an invalid warrant is justified in using force as if the warrant was valid, unless the officer 
knows that the warrant is invalid. (d) A law enforcement officer who has an arrested person in custody is 
justified in using the same force to prevent the escape of the arrested person from custody that the officer 
would be justified in using if the officer was arresting that person.  However, an officer is justified in using 
deadly force only if the officer: (1) Has probable cause to believe that deadly force is necessary to prevent 
the escape from custody of a person who the officer has probable cause to believe poses a threat of 
serious bodily injury to the officer or third person; and (2) Has given a warning, if feasible, to the person 
against whom the deadly force is to be used. 
 
IC 35-41-1-7 states: Deadly Force; Force that creates a substantial risk of serious bodily injury. 
 
IC 35-41-1-25 states: Serious Bodily Injury; means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or 
that causes: (1) serious permanent disfigurement; (2) unconsciousness; (3) extreme pain; (4) permanent or 
protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member or organ; or (5) loss of a fetus.  
 
IC 35-41-1-11 states: Forcible Felony; A felony that involves the use or threat of force against a human 
being, or in which there is imminent danger of bodily injury to a human being. 
 
 
I.    Factors Used to Determine the Reasonableness of Force 
 
 

A.  When determining whether or not to apply any level of force or when evaluating whether an officer 
has used reasonable force, there are a number of factors to be considered.  An officer’s use of force 
is  individually  assessed  by  the  standards  set  by  the  Fourth  Amendment  to  the  United  States 
Constitution and by the subsequent affected case decisions.   

 

 
 

See Graham v Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989).  
The U. S. Supreme Court applied the reasonableness test of the Fourth Amendment to use of force 
inquiries.  Specifically, the test to determine the reasonableness of the force occurs by balancing 
the government’s interest in making the seizure against the nature and quality of the intrusion.  The 
nature and quality of the intrusion represents the amount or type of force the officer used.  Applying 
the test requires careful attention to the facts and circumstances known to the officer at the time the 
force was used, Id at 396. 
 
 

Page 2 of 8 

JULY 6, 2012 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 

 
 

 
 

 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

1.30 

To apply the test, the Graham decision states in part, “The reasonableness of a particular use of 
force must be judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, rather than with the 
20/20 vision of hindsight.  The calculus of reasonableness must embody allowance for the fact that 
police officers are often forced to make split-second judgments – in circumstances that are tense, 
uncertain  and  rapidly  evolving  –  about  the  amount  of  force  that  is  necessary  in  a  particular 
situation.”   

The force must be reasonable under the circumstances known to the officer at the time the force 
was used.  Therefore, the department and subsequently the courts examine all uses of force from 
an objective standard rather than a subjective standard.  Those factors may include, but are not 
limited to:  

1.  The severity of the crime; 

2.  Whether the suspect posed an immediate threat to the safety of the officer(s) or others; 

3.  Whether the suspect was actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flight; 

4.  The conduct of the individual being confronted (as reasonably perceived by the officer at the 

time); 

5.  Officer versus suspect/subject factors (age, size, relative strength, skill level, injury/exhaustion 

and number of officers vs. subjects);  

6.  Whether the suspect was under the influence of drugs/alcohol (mental capacity); 

7.  The degree to which the subject was effectively restrained and his/her ability to resist despite 

being restrained; 

8.  Information known about the subject to include; history of violence, criminal background, special 

tactical training and/or martial arts training; 
 

 
9.  Proximity of weapons; 

10. The risk of escape; 

11. Time  and  circumstances  permitting,  the  availability  of  other  options  (what  resources  were 

reasonably available to the officer under the circumstances); 

13.  Other exigent circumstances. 

12.  Training and experience of the officer; and 

 
 
 
 
 
B.  It is recognized however, that circumstances may arise in which officers reasonably believe that it 
would be impractical or ineffective to use any of the standard tools, weapons or methods provided 
by the department.  Officers may find it necessary, more effective or practical to improvise their 
response to rapidly unfolding conditions they are confronting.  In such circumstances, the use of 
any improvised device or method must nonetheless be objectively reasonable and utilized only to 
the degree reasonably necessary to accomplish a legitimate law enforcement purpose.  

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 
 

JULY 6, 2012 

Page 3 of 8 

1.30 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

 
 
II.  Less Lethal Force Options 
 
 

A.  Less lethal force options may be used when, in the officer’s opinion, persuasive speech or physical 
contact controls are insufficient, unsafe or impractical to control or stop an aggressive act or forcible 
resistance. These  options  are  not  intended to  substitute for the  use  of  deadly  force  when it  is 
reasonable and necessary.  There is neither a requirement nor an expectation that officers attempt 
to use or exhaust less lethal options in situations requiring the use of deadly force.  

B.  Generally, less lethal force options should not be used on people who are properly handcuffed or 
secured for transportation.  However in situations where an officer is physically threatened with 
forcible resistance by a handcuffed subject, and there are no other reasonable force alternatives, 
control devices pursuant to G.O. 1.34 may be used to assist in gaining control of the individual. 

 
  C.  Any less lethal option may be utilized against aggressive animals.  
 
  D.  The department authorizes the use of the following less lethal weapons to include but not limited to 
o-chlorobenzylindenemalononitrile/oleoresincapsicum (CS/OC) spray, PepperBall® deployment 
systems, extended range impact devices in twelve gauge shotgun, 37 and 40 mm launchers for the 
delivery of kinetic energy impact projectiles and electronic control devices.  

 
III. Deadly Force Applications 
 
 

A.  While  the  use  of  a  firearm  is  expressly  considered  deadly  force,  other  force  might  also  be 
considered deadly force if the force applied will create a substantial likelihood of causing death or 
serious bodily injury (refer to G.O. 1.31 Officer Involved Shootings and G.O. 1.32 Firearms Review 
Board for additional information regarding the shooting policy and related investigative procedures). 

B.  Department-authorized firearms use 

Firearms  shall  be  used  and  maintained  only  as  documented  in  training  provided  by  the 
department’s  Firearms  Training  Section  (refer  to  General  Order  1.8  Firearms  for  information 
regarding the acquisition, use, and documentation of training in the use of firearms).  

1.  Nothing in this directive precludes an officer from un-holstering a firearm in a dangerous or life-
threatening situation, such as serving a high-risk warrant, building search, felony vehicle stop or 
other situations where the presentation of a firearm is a reasonable use of force. 

2.  Officers  are  authorized  to  carry  only  those  firearms  and  ammunition  types  specifically 
designated by the Firearms Training Section and approved by the chief of police.  This includes 
the on-duty firearm, as well as any back-up or off-duty firearms for use in an official capacity.  

3.  Officers shall demonstrate proficiency with any firearm that will be used in an official capacity 
before  that  weapon  may  be  carried  and  comply  with  all  training  requirements  for  specific 
firearms, as directed by the department. 

4.  Use of any other unauthorized firearm or non-approved accessories or ammunition in an official 

 

 

 

 

capacity is prohibited.  

 
  C.  Discharges from department-authorized firearms   
 
 

 

1.  All  discharges from  department-authorized  firearms,  on-duty  or  off-duty, except for  training 
and/or qualification purposes, shall be immediately reported to an on-duty supervisor by the 
involved officer in the most expedient method possible. The on-duty supervisor shall make 
appropriate notification to his/her district commander or designee and respond to the scene of 
the incident and conduct an investigation. 

Page 4 of 8 

JULY 6, 2012 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

1.30 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.  The use of any department-owned firearm for sport/recreational use, or by anyone other than 
the assigned officer unless approved by the officer’s commander via chain of command, is 
prohibited. 

3.  The involved officer shall complete an initial police report and provide it to the assigned field 
supervisor responsible for the investigation prior to the end of shift if on-duty and if off-duty, as 
directed by the field supervisor. 

4.  All  discharges of  a  department-authorized  firearm  shall  be  investigated  to  determine  if the 
shooting is within the law and department policy.  The responsible supervisor will prepare a 
Firearms Investigation Report (Other than Animal) or a Destruction of Animal (Firearm 
Report).  The summary section shall be completed in detail in lieu of completing a Supervisory 
Special Report.  

a.  The Firearms Investigation Report, with one copy of the involved officer’s initial police report 

will be forwarded through the chain of command to the chief of police. 

b.  The chief of police will assign the case to his/her Executive Staff designee for compilation, 
review and filing and the case will be forwarded to the Firearms Review Board for their 
recommendation  to  the  chief  of  police  (refer  to  G.O.  1.32  Firearms  Review  Board  for 
additional information regarding the administrative review process). 

5.  If an uninvolved department member has knowledge of an unreported shooting incident they 

shall report the known facts to a supervisor. 

6.  Moving vehicles 

Unless it reasonably appears that it would endanger officers or the public, officers are expected 
to move out of the path of any approaching vehicle, however, 

a.  This is not intended to restrict an officer’s right to use deadly force directed at the operator 
of a vehicle when it is reasonably perceived that the vehicle is being used as a weapon 
against the officer or others.  

b.  Officers may use deadly force to stop a fleeing suspect when the officer has probable cause 
to believe that  the  suspect  has committed,  or  intends to commit,  a felony  involving  the 
infliction or threat of serious bodily injury and the officer reasonably believes that there is an 
imminent  or  future  potential  risk  of  serious  bodily  injury  to  others  if  the  suspect  is  not 
immediately apprehended.  Under such circumstances, a verbal warning should precede the 
use of deadly force when feasible.  

 

 

c.  Officers  shall  not  discharge  a  firearm  from  a  moving  vehicle,  except  in  exigent 

circumstances and in the immediate defense of life. 

NOTE 

This policy, in regards to discharging a firearm at or from a moving vehicle, 
may not cover every situation that may arise.  In all situations, officers are 
expected to act with professional maturity, exercising sound judgment.  Any 
deviation from the provisions of this policy shall be examined on a case-by-
case  basis.    The  involved  officer  must  be  able  to  clearly  articulate  the 
reasons for the use of deadly force. 

 

 

 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 
 

JULY 6, 2012 

Page 5 of 8 

1.30 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

 

7.  Warning shots  

Generally, warning shots are prohibited and may not be discharged.  However, in exceptional 
circumstances, and where a warning shot(s) might reasonably be expected to avoid the need to 
use deadly force, the warning shot(s) shall be directed in a manner that minimizes the risk of 
injury to innocent persons, ricochet dangers and property damage.  

 
  D.  Firearms discharges causing injury or death  
 
 

 

1.  The Homicide Section will investigate and properly document all officer discharges resulting in 

an attempt to injure, an actual injury or death to a person.  

2.  The Professional Standards Division/ Internal Affairs Section will conduct a parallel investigation 
which will remain separate and independent of the homicide investigation.   The Internal Affairs 
Section commander will be responsible for overseeing the internal investigation and reporting 
the results through the Professional Standards Division commander to the chief of police.  Refer 
to G.O. 1.31- Officer Involved Shootings for information regarding the investigative procedure. 

 
IV. Notification and Documentation of the Use of Force 
 
 

A.  An officer shall notify a supervisor via Communications as soon as practical following a use of force 

incident as specifically outlined in this general order and as described below:  

1.  Force applied through the use of deadly or non-deadly weapons. 

2.  Discharge of an authorized firearm for other than training purposes. 

3.  Force  applied  resulting  in,  or  alleged  to  have  resulted  in,  serious  bodily  injury,  injury  or 

complaint of pain of another person. 

B.  An officer shall promptly document any use of force described above as follows:  

1.  The officer will obtain a case number from Communications and write an initial police report. 

2.  The officer’s initial police report will describe the contributing factors leading up to and ultimately 
requiring the use of force in the “Narrative” section, as well as in the “Probable Cause” section if 
an arrest resulted. 

3.  The officer will include a description of the force used and describe any resulting injuries to the 

arrestee, the officer and/or any involved citizens. 

4.  The officer will be responsible for having photos taken of all injuries and will document the 

information in the initial police report. 

 

 
  C.  The officer’s supervisor shall respond to the scene and complete a Supervisory Special Report 

documenting the use of force as outlined in this general order.    

1.  The supervisor’s report narrative will include the required documentation for the involved officer.  

2.  The supervisor’s Supervisory Special Report will be forwarded to the affected division chief 
within 72 hours of the incident, along with copies of all related paperwork. Refer to G.O. 1.33 
Electronic Control Devices, G. O. 1.34 Control Devices and G.O. 4.2 Canine Response for the 
corresponding Supervisory Special Report requirements. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Page 6 of 8 

JULY 6, 2012 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

1.30 

 
 
 
V. Medical Attention for Injuries Sustained Using Force  
 
 

A.  Other than specifically addressed above, or as stated in General Orders 1.33 and 1.34, medical 
assistance shall be obtained for any person who has sustained visible injury, expressed a complaint 
of injury, continuing pain or serious bodily injury.  Based upon the officer’s initial assessment of the 
nature and extent of the subject’s injuries, medical assistance may consist of examination by IMPD 
personnel, firefighters, paramedics, hospital staff or medical staff at the APC or jail.  If any such 
individual refuses medical attention, such refusal shall be fully documented in related reports and 
whenever practical, should be witnessed by another officer and/or medical personnel.  If an audio 
recording is made of the contact or an interview with the individual, any refusal should be included if 
possible. 

B.  Persons who exhibit any combination of the following factors may be at an increased risk of sudden 

death and should be examined by qualified medical personnel as soon as possible: 

3.  Profuse sweating; 
4.  Extraordinary strength beyond physical characteristics; 
5.  Unusual high tolerance to pain; and/or 
6.  Require a protracted physical encounter with multiple officers to bring under control. 

 
 

1.  Extreme agitation; 
2.  Violent irrational behavior; 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
VI.  Supervisor Responsibility 
 
 

A.  Other than as specifically addressed above, when a supervisor responds to an incident in which 

there has been a reported application of force, the supervisor is expected to: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.  Obtain the basic facts from the involved officer(s); 

2.  Ensure that any injured parties are examined and treated; 

a.  Photos of IMPD K-9 bites shall be taken after treatment by an authorized medical provider.   

3.  Separately interview the subject(s) upon whom the force was applied; 

4.  Ensure photographs have been taken of any areas involving visible injury.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  C.  Should the supervisor determine that any application of force was not within policy, the supervisor 

B.  In the event the supervisor believes the incident may give rise to potential civil litigation, a separate
  memorandum form shall be completed and routed to the district commander via chain of command. 

6.  Review, complete and submit all related reports through the chain of command. 

b.  Photos and other documentation shall include the location and number of bites. 

5.  Identify and interview any witnesses not already included in related reports; 

 

 

 

 

shall initiate a separate internal administrative investigation. 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 
 

JULY 6, 2012 

Page 7 of 8 

1.30 

USE OF FORCE 
GENERAL ORDER 

 
 
VII. Annual Analysis   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Report; 

A.  The department will maintain records for use of force incidents involving: 

1.  Discharges of firearms; or 
 
2.  Any force alleged to have resulted in serious bodily injury of another; or 
 
3.  Any force through the use of deadly or non-deadly weapons; 

4.  Any use of force where injury occurred and the injury was documented by a Supervisory Special 

5.  Records for use of force incidents will be maintained by the Professional Standards Division. 
 

 
 
B.  The  Professional  Standards  Division  will  be  responsible  for  conducting  a  documented  annual 
analysis of the above reports by reviewing the incidents in an effort to reveal patterns or trends that 
could indicate training needs, equipment upgrades and/or policy modifications.  

 
  C.  The  resulting  report  from  the  annual  analysis  shall  be  forwarded  to  the  Training  Division 

commander or designee, for evaluation and implementation. 

NOTE 

Any deviation from the provisions of this policy shall be examined on a case by 
case basis.  The involved officer must be able to clearly articulate the reasons for 
the use of force. 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

Page 8 of 8 

 

JULY 6, 2012 

WILLIAM D. LORAH – Chief of Police 

