Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

USE OF FORCE POLICY 
POLICY  
DEFINITIONS 
DETERMINING OBJECTIVELY REASONABLE FORCE 
MEDICAL ATTENTION 
USE OF FORCE MODEL 

USE OF FORCE PROCEDURE 
USE OF FORCE TO AFFECT A DETENTION, AN ARREST OR TO CONDUCT A 
SEARCH 
DUTY TO INTERVENE 
LEVELS OF RESISTANCE (see Use of Force Model) 
LEVELS OF CONTROL (see Use of Force Model) 
DE-ESCALATION 

AUTHORIZED FORCE TOOLS, DESCRIPTION, REQUIREMENTS, USES AND 
CONSIDERATIONS 
PRESENCE AND VERBAL COMMUNICATION 
EMPTY HAND TACTICS  
HANDCUFFS, FLEXIBLE HANDCUFFS, OR OTHER RESTRAINT DEVICES  
BATON/IMPACT WEAPONS  
OLEORESIN CAPSICUM SPRAY 
LATERAL VASCULAR NECK RESTRAINT® 
ELECTRONIC CONTROL DEVICE  
USE OF CANINE 
USE OF FORCE WITH A VEHICLE 
a. Precision Intervention Technique 
b. Blocking 
c. Stationary Vehicle Immobilization Technique (Pinching) 
d. Ramming 
USE OF FORCE WITH A FIREARM 
a. Low Lethality Shotgun 
b. Handgun/Shotgun(“OO” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 
c. Deployment of Rifles   

REPORTABLE USE OF FORCE  
REPORTABLE FORCE INCIDENTS 
INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTING 

USE OF FORCE POLICY 

I.
II.
III.

POLICY  
DEFINITIONS 
DETERMINING OBJECTIVELY REASONABLE FORCE 

1148 

6/002.00 
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.

 
6/002.01 
I.

 
6/002.02 

II.
III.
IV.
V.

I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.

X.

 
6/002.03     

I.
II.

 
6/002.00 
 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

IV.

USE OF FORCE MODEL 

 

 

I. POLICY  

 
The  Las  Vegas  Metropolitan  Police  Department  is  committed  to  protecting  people,  their 
property  and  rights,  while  providing  the  best  in  public  safety  and  service.  The  proper 
use of force is essential for policing. There are circumstances where individuals will not 
comply  with  the  law  unless  compelled  or  controlled  by  the  use  of  force.  Yet,  officers 
must  also  remain  mindful  that  they  derive  their  authority  from  the  community  and  that 
unreasonable force degrades the legitimacy of that authority. In a Use of Force Incident, 
the  governmental  interest  must  match  the  level  of  force  and  intrusion  upon  an 
individual’s constitutional rights.   
 
It  is  the  policy  of  this  department  that  officers  hold  the  highest  regard  for  the  dignity 
and  liberty  of  all  persons,  and  place  minimal  reliance  upon  the  use  of  force.  The 
department  respects  the  value  of  every  human  life  and  that  the  application  of  deadly 
force is a measure to be employed in the most extreme circumstances.  
 
II.
 

DEFINITIONS 

1.  Approved  Weapons  –  Approved  weapons  are  those  weapons  meeting  department 
specifications for which officers receive proficiency and safety training. Prior to 
the  use  of  any  approved  weapon  option,  the  officer,  when  practical,  will 
communicate  to  other  officers  and  the  subject  that  the  use  of  the  option  is 
imminent, and clearly and audibly announce the same to all personnel in the 
immediate area unless exigent circumstances prevent this from occurring. 
 

Blocking  -  Blocking  is  the  positioning  of  a  police  vehicle  in  the  path  of  an 
occupied subject vehicle where contact between the vehicles is not anticipated 
or  is  anticipated  to  be  minimal.  The  intent  of  blocking  is  to  prevent  an 
avenue of escape by the safe placement of a police vehicle.  
 

Cuffing  Under  Power  -  Cuffing  under  Power  is  a  tactic  where  a  secondary  officer 
handcuffs a subject while the ECD (being deployed by the primary officer) is 
cycling and the subject is in Neuro-Muscular Incapacitation (NMI). 

 
Critical  Incident  Review  Team  (CIRT)  -  A  team  put  in  place  to  conduct  an 
administrative  examination  of  uses  of  deadly  force  and  other  high-risk  law 
enforcement  operations,  for  the  purpose  of  improving  both  individual  and  the 
agency’s performance.  

Deadly  Force  -  Deadly  force  is  that  degree  of  force,  which  is  likely  to  produce 
death  or  serious  bodily  injury.  Deadly  force  can  also  result  from  a  force 

1149 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

option  being  improperly  applied.    Deadly  force  is  not  limited  to  the  use  of 
firearms. 

Electronic  Control  Device  (ECD)  -  The  ECD  is  a  Neuro-Muscular  Incapacitation 
(NMI)  device  that  stimulates  the  motor  neurons  to  contract  disrupting 
communication from the brain to the muscles thereby causing temporary motor 
skill dysfunction.  

Spark Display – A non-contact demonstration of the ECD’s ability to 

1. 

2. 

3. 

discharge electricity.   

Touch Stun - A secondary function of the ECD intended to administer 
pain to a subject by making direct contact with the body after the air 
cartridge has been expended or removed.   

Probe  Mode  -  The  primary  function  of  the  ECD  where  the  ECD 
cartridge is deployed firing probes at the subject. The intent is that the 
subject  be  temporarily  immobilized  for  the  period  of  time  the  ECD  is 
cycled. 

Fatal  Detail  –  A  section  of  the  Traffic  Bureau  who  conducts  or  assists  in 
investigations related to uses of force with a vehicle which may cause serious 
bodily injury, or result in death. 

 
Force  Transitions  -  The  movement,  escalation/de-escalation,  from  the  application  of 
one  force  type  to  another  in  conjunction  with  the  “objectively  reasonable” 
standard  from  Graham  v.  Connor,  490  U.S.  386  (1989).  The  officer  must 
consider  all  the  factors  prior  to  using  force  and  choose  a  reasonable  option 
based on the “totality of the circumstances” present.  

The LVMPD Use of Force Policy applies to all commissioned officers, but the 
legal  standard  specific  to  incidents  involving  use  of  force  within  a  detention 
facility are set forth in Hudson v. McMillian, 503 U.S. 1(1992). 

 
Force  Investigation  Team  (FIT)  -  Conducts  a  criminal  investigation  to  determine 
whether  the  use  of  deadly  force  was  legally  justified  under  criminal  law.  FIT 
also  directs  the  investigation  against  a  subject  who  either  committed  crimes 
which  led  to  the  use  of  deadly  force  or  who  has  committed  crimes  against 
an officer. 
 

Imminent  Threat  -  “Imminent  threat”  refers  to  an  impending  violent  act  or 
resistance  that  an  officer  reasonably  believes  will  occur,  based  on  the  totality 
of the circumstances.  

Intermediate  Force  -  A  level  of  force  that  has  the  potential  to  cause injury  or 

substantial pain, and is greater than Low-Level Force. 

1150 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Involved  Officer  –  A  commissioned  officer  or supervisor, who participated  in, 

directed or influenced the application of the use of force. 

Lateral Vascular Neck Restraint (LVNR®) - LVNR® is a specific method of applying 
pressure  to  the  side  of  a  subject’s  neck  to  overcome  resistance  and  allow 
safe  control.  This  technique  is  used  only  in  accordance  with  official 
departmental training and policy. 

Levels  of  Control  -  Levels  of  Control are  broad  categories  of  influence  and/or  force 
in  identifiable,  escalating  stages  of  intensity.  They  are  identified  as  low  level 
force, intermediate force, and deadly force. 

Low  Level  Force  -  Low  level  force  is  a  level  of  force  or  control  that  is  neither 

likely nor intended to cause injury. 

Non-Deadly  Force  -  Non-deadly  force  is  the  level  of  force  required  to  compel 
compliance, which is not intended to, and is not known to create a substantial 
risk of causing death or serious bodily harm. 

Officer-Involved Shooting  -  An  officer-involved  shooting  is  an  officer’s  discharge  of 
a  firearm  at  a  person,  with  or  without  physical  injury  or  the  death  of  the 
person.   

Officer Witness Monitor - An Officer Witness Monitor is a designated officer who is 
not  involved  in  the  use  of  deadly  force.  The  responsibilities  of  the  Officer 
Witness Monitor are to observe and prevent discussions regarding the incident 
among involved officer(s) and witness(s).  

Other  Firearm  Discharge  -  An  “other  firearm  discharge”  is  an  unintentional 
discharge  of  a  firearm  that  does  not  cause  injury  or  death  to  a  person  or 
the intentional shooting at, injuring, or killing animals. 

Precision Intervention Technique (PIT) - The PIT is a specific manner of intentional 
contact  using  a  police  vehicle  against  a  fleeing  vehicle  to  cause  the  fleeing 
vehicle  to  come  to  a  stop;  this  technique  is  used  only  in  accordance  with 
official department training and policy. 

Public  Safety  Statement  (PSS)  -  The  PSS  is  a  series  of  questions  to  obtain 
information  to  determine  if  there  is  an  immediate  threat  to  public  safety  and 
must be taken in a timely manner. (An example would be shots fired by an 
officer  or  a  subject  in  the  direction  where  the  public  may  be  in  immediate 
danger.)  The supervisor must take appropriate action to ensure public safety, 
based on the information received from the PSS. 

1151 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Ramming  -  The  use  of  a  vehicle  to  intentionally  hit  another  vehicle,  outside  the 
approved PIT, blocking and stationary vehicle immobilization policies.  Ramming 
is  prohibited  unless  it  is  a  deadly  force  situation  which  can  be  clearly 
articulated. 

Reasonable  Force - Reasonable  force  is  an  objective  standard  of  force  viewed 
from  the  perspective  of  a  reasonable  officer,  without  the  benefit  of  20/20 
hindsight,  and  based  on  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  presented  at  the 
moment the force is used. See section IV. “Determining Objectively Reasonable 
Force.”  

Reportable  Force  -  Reportable  force  is  any  use  of  force  which  is  required  to 
overcome subject resistance to gain compliance that results in death, injury or 
complaint  of  injury,  complaint  of  continuing  pain,  or  any  use  of  force  greater 
than  low  level  force  (see  Levels  of  Control)  and  any  application  of  the 
LVNR®. 

Serious  Bodily  Injury  -  A  bodily  injury  that  creates  a  substantial  risk  of  death; 
causes  serious,  permanent  disfigurement;  or  results  in  a  prolonged  loss  or 
impairment of the functioning of any bodily member or organ.   

Significant Force - Any force which results in treatment at a medical facility due 
to injuries or alleged injuries caused by any officer. Examples include, but are 
not  limited  to:  skeletal  fractures;  injury  or  complaint  of  injury  to  a  person’s 
head or sternum area. All Significant Force is Reportable Force. 

Stationary Vehicle Immobilization Technique (Pinching) - Is a containment tactic whose 
use  is  restricted  for  specialized  units.  It  employs  extremely  low-speed, 
intentional vehicle contact with a  subject vehicle. The purpose is to render a 
vehicle immobile by blocking it in place with police vehicles, so that subjects 
can be taken into custody. 

Use  of  Force  Model – A  visual  guide  describing  the  appropriate  levels  of  force 
authorized  to  be  used  by  an  officer  in  response  to  the  level  of  resistance 
being displayed by a subject. 

Witness  Officer – A  commissioned  officer  or  supervisor  who  did  not participate  in 

or directly influence the application of the use of force. 

 
DETERMINING OBJECTIVELY REASONABLE FORCE 
 
The United States Supreme Court decisions and interpretations of the Fourth Amendment 
of  the  United  States  Constitution  a  police  officer  may  only  use  such  force  as  is 
“objectively reasonable” under all of the circumstances. The standard that courts will use 

1152 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 
to  examine  whether  a  use  of  force  is  constitutional  was  first  set  forth  in  Graham  v. 
Connor,  490  U.S.  386  (1989)  and  expanded  by  subsequent  court  cases.  The 
reasonableness  of  a  particular  use  of  force  must  be  judged  from  the  perspective  of  a 
reasonable  officer  on  the  scene,  rather  than  with  20/20  vision  of  hindsight.  The 
reasonableness  must  account  for  the  fact  that  officers  are  often  forced  to  make  split-
second judgments - in circumstances that are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving.  
 
The reasonableness inquiry in reviewing use of force is an objective one: the question is 
whether  the  officer’s  actions  are  objectively  reasonable  in  light  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances  confronting  them.    The  officer’s  perception  will  be  a  consideration,  along 
with  other  objective  factors  that  may  affect  the  reasonableness  of  the  force.  These 
factors may include but are not limited to: 

1.  The severity of the crime(s) at issue; 
2.  Whether  the  subject  poses  an  immediate  threat  to  the  safety  of  the 

3.  Whether  the  subject  is  actively  resisting  arrest  or  attempting  to  evade 

officer(s) or others; 

arrest by flight; 

4.  The influence of drugs/alcohol or the mental capacity of the subject; 
5.  The time available to an officer to make a decision; 
6.  The availability of officers/resources to de-escalate the situation; 
7.  The proximity or access of weapons to the subject; 
8.  The environmental factors and/or other exigent circumstances.  

 

The  officer  will  use  a  level  of  force  that  is  necessary  and  within  the  range  of 
“objectively reasonable”  options.  When  use  of  force  is  needed,  officers will  assess  each 
incident to determine, based on policy, training and experience, which use of force option 
will  de-escalate  the  situation  and  bring  it under  control  in  a  safe  and  prudent  manner. 
Reasonable and sound judgment will dictate the force option to be employed. Therefore, 
the  department  examines  all  uses  of  force  from  an  objective  standard  rather  than  a 
subjective standard.  
 
The  LVMPD  Use  of  Force  Policy  applies  to  all  commissioned  officers,  but  the  legal 
standard  specific  to  incidents  involving  use  of  force  within  a  detention  facility  are  set 
forth  in  Hudson  v.  McMillian,  503  U.S.  1(1992).  Corrections  officers  will  follow  DSD 
Standard Operating Procedure(s) regarding the Use of Force as applicable (i.e. DSD SOP 
09.11.01 Use of Force).  
 
LVMPD  allows  certain  classifications  of  civilian  employees  to  carry  a  firearm  and  OC 
spray  while  on  duty.    Civilian  employees  have  no  power  of  arrest  and  therefore  may 
only use force consist with Nevada law on self-defense or defense of others.    
 
MEDICAL ATTENTION 
 
Whenever  an  officer  applies  a  Use  of  Force  option  upon  a  subject  that  results  in  a 

 

1153 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 
visible  injury  or  complaint  of  injury,  the  officer  will  monitor  the  subject  and  immediately 
summon medical attention.  When requesting medical attention, the officer will provide the 
nature of the injury for responding medical personnel.   
 
Note: In some instances, the best course of action may be to transport the subject to 
the  nearest  medical  facility.   In  these  instances,  the  nature  of  injury,  response  time  of 
medical personnel and proximity of the medical facility should be considered.   
 
Medical attention will be summoned for the following Use of Force applications regardless 
of visible injury or complaint of injury: 
 

1.  Baton/Impact Weapons-Any strikes to the head, neck or groin area. 
2.  OC Spray- Direct exposure to the facial area. 
3.  LVNR®-When applied. 
4.  ECD-Probe strikes to the head, neck or groin area.    
5.  Use of Canine- All bites 
6.  Use of Force with a vehicle: 

a.  Precision Intervention Technique- Over 40 MPH. 
b.  Blocking- Contact with an occupied vehicle. 
c.  Stationary Vehicle Immobilization Technique (Pinching)-All. 
d.  Ramming-All. 

7.  Use of Force with a Firearm: 

a.  Low Lethality Shotgun-All strikes. 
b.  Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle-Any discharge. 

 

USE OF FORCE MODEL    

 

1154 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 

This  graphic  is  intended  as  a  general  guideline  for  an  officer.    The  subject(s)  actions 
will dictate the Resistance Level and officers will make an “objectively reasonable” force 
option  choice.  Corrections  officers  will  follow  their  established  standard  operating 
procedures in incidents involving  use of force within a detention  facility. (I.e. DSD SOP 
09.11.01 Use of Force.) 
 
In use of force incidents, the officer will transition to differing degrees or types of force, 
including attempts to de-escalate. Force situations are dynamic and require an officer to 
continually  assess  the  subject’s  actions  to  ensure  an  objectively  reasonable  response. 
Officers shall modify their Level of Control in relation to the amount of resistance offered 
by a subject. (5/14, 8/14)■ 
 

 

1155 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

USE OF FORCE PROCEDURE 

6/002.01 
 
I. USE  OF  FORCE  TO  AFFECT  A  DETENTION,  AN  ARREST  OR  TO  CONDUCT  A 

SEARCH 

II. DUTY TO INTERVENE 
III. LEVELS OF RESISTANCE (see Use of Force Model) 
IV. LEVELS OF CONTROL (see Use of Force Model) 
V. DE-ESCALATION 

USE  OF  FORCE  TO  AFFECT  A  DETENTION,  AN  ARREST  OR  TO  CONDUCT  A 
SEARCH 
 

A.  Officers may use reasonable force: 
1.  To protect themselves; 
2.  To protect others; 
3.  To affect a lawful detention; 
4.  To affect a lawful arrest; 
5.  To conduct a lawful search.  
 

B.  If  it  is  not  already  known  by  the  subject  to  be  detained,  arrested,  or 
searched, officers should, if reasonable, make clear their intent to detain, arrest 
or search the subject.  When practicable, officers will identify themselves as a 
peace officer before using force. 

 
DUTY TO INTERVENE 
 
Any officer present and observing another officer using force that is clearly beyond that 
which is objectively reasonable under the circumstances shall, when in a position to do 
so,  safely  intercede  to  prevent  the  use  of  such  excessive  force.  Officers  shall  promptly 
report these observations to a supervisor.   
 
LEVELS OF RESISTANCE (see Use of Force Model, 6/002.00) 
 
It is important for officers to bear in mind that there are many reasons a suspect may 
be resisting arrest or may be unresponsive. The person in question may not be capable 
of understanding the gravity of the situation. Officers must consider several factors when 
dealing with a non-compliant subject.  A subject may be non-compliant due to a medical 
condition,  mental,  physical,  or  hearing  impairment,  language  barrier,  drug  interaction  or 
emotional  crisis,  and  have  no  criminal  intent.  This  may  not  make  the  subject  any  less 
dangerous  but  it  may  require  a  change  in  tactics  that  will  be  more  effective  while 
maintaining officer safety, once these circumstances are known to the officer. 
 

22. Compliant - A person contacted by an officer who acknowledges direction or lawful 
orders given and offers no passive/active, aggressive, or aggravated aggressive 

1156 

 
I.

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

resistance. 
 

Passive Resistance - The subject is not complying with an officer’s commands and 
is  uncooperative,  but  is  taking  only  minimal  physical  action  to  prevent  an 
officer  from  placing  the  subject  in  custody  and  taking  control.  Examples 
include: standing stationary and not moving upon lawful direction, falling limply 
and  refusing  to  use  their  own  power  to  move  (becoming  “dead  weight”), 
holding  onto  a  fixed  object,  or  locking  arms  to  another  during  a  protest  or 
demonstration. 
 

Active  Resistance  -  The  subject’s  verbal  or  physical  actions  are  intended  to 
prevent  an  officer  from  placing  the  subject in  custody and  taking  control,  but 
are not directed at harming the officer.  Examples include: walking or running 
away, breaking the officer’s grip.  

 
------------------------------ SUBJECT’S INTENT TO HARM -------------------------------- 

 

Aggressive  Resistance  -  The  subject  displays  the  intent  to  harm  the  officer, 
themselves or  another person  and  prevent  an  officer from  placing  the  subject 
in  custody  and  taking  control.  The  aggression  may  manifest  itself  through  a 
subject  taking  a  fighting  stance,  punching,  kicking,  striking,  attacks  with 
weapons  or  other  actions  which  present  an  imminent  threat  of  physical  harm 
to the officer or another. 
 

Aggravated  Aggressive  Resistance  -  The  subject’s  actions  are  likely  to  result  in 
death  or  serious  bodily  harm  to  the  officer,  themselves  or  another.  These 
actions  may  include  a  firearm,  use  of  blunt  or  bladed  weapon,  and  extreme 
physical force.  

 

1157 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 
LEVELS OF CONTROL (see Use of Force Model, 6/002.00) 

 

 
When  use  of  force  is  needed,  officers  will  assess  each  incident  to  determine, 
based on policy, training and experience, which use of force option is believed to 
be  objectively  reasonable  for  the  situation  and  bring  it  under  control  in  a  safe 
and prudent manner.  
 

1.  Low  Level  Force  -  Low  level  force  is  a  level  of  force  or  control  that  is  neither 
likely  nor  intended  to  cause  injury.  Examples  are  handcuffing  a  compliant 
arrestee for transport to detention facility or proning a suspect out on a high-
risk vehicle stop.  

This level of force includes: 
1.  Officer Presence 
2.  Verbal Communication 
3.  Empty Hand Tactics (Takedowns) 

4.  Handcuffs/Other LVMPD Approved Restraint Devices 
5.  Baton (As escort tool) 
6.  LVNR® (Level One – minimum restraint) 
7.  Canine   
8.  Pinching 
9.  Blocking 

 

Intermediate  Force  -  A  level  of  force  that  has  the  potential  to  cause  injury  or 

substantial pain, and is greater than Low-Level Force. 

 
This level of force requires a Use of Force Report and includes: 

1.  Empty Hand Tactics (Takedown with injury, Strikes, Kicks) 
2.  Baton/Impact Weapons (Jabs, Strikes) 
3.  LVNR® (Level 2 – medium restraint; and 3-maximum restraint) 
4.  OC Spray 
5.  ECD 
6.  Low Lethality Shotgun (five yards or greater) 
7.  Canine  
8.  P.I.T. (Speeds 40mph or below) 

Deadly  Force  -  Deadly  force  is  that  degree  of  force,  which  is  likely  to  produce 
death  or  serious  bodily  injury.  Deadly  force  can  also  result  from  a  force 
option being improperly applied.  In order for the Use of Deadly Force to be 
justified,  at  least  one  of  the  parameters  and  all  elements  must  be  present. 
Examples include but are not limited to: 
1.  Baton (Striking head, neck, sternum, spine, groin, or kidneys) 
2.  Low Lethality Shotgun (Fired at a distance less than five yards) 
3.  P.I.T. (More than 40mph) 

1158 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

4.  Ramming 
5.  Firearm Use  

 

Parameters for Use of Deadly Force 
An  officer  may  use  deadly  force  upon  another  person  only  when  it  is 
objectively reasonable to: 

1.  Protect  himself  or  others  from  what  is  reasonably  believed  to  be  an 

imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury; 

2.  Prevent  the  escape  of  a  fleeing  felon  who  the  officer  has  probable 
cause  to  believe  has  committed  a  violent  felony  crime  and  is  an 
imminent  threat  to  human  life  if  escape  should  occur.  (See  NRS 
171.1455.)  Officers will give some warning, if feasible, prior to the use 
of deadly force.  

Example:  “Police!  Stop or I will shoot!” 

 

Elements of Deadly Force 
 

1.  Ability  -  Ability  exists  when  a  person  has  the  means  or  capability  to 
cause  grave  injury,  serious  bodily  harm  or  death  to  an  officer  or 
another.  This  may  include,  but  is  not  limited  to  the  following:  the 
subject’s  physical  ability,  size,  age,  strength,  combative  skill,  level  of 
aggression, and any weapons in their immediate control. 

2.  Opportunity  -  Opportunity  exists  when  a  person  is  in  a  position  to 
effectively  resist  an  officer’s  control  or  to  use  force  or  violence  upon 
the  officer  or  another.  Examples  which  may  affect  opportunity  include: 
relative distance to the officer or others, and physical barriers between 
the subject and the officer. 
Imminent  Jeopardy  -  Based  upon  all  the  facts  and  a  circumstance 
confronting the officer, the officer reasonably believes the subject poses 
an  imminent  threat  to  the  life  of  the  officer(s)  or  other  third  parties 
and the officer must act immediately to prevent death or serious bodily 
injury.  

3. 

4.  Preclusion  -  Lesser  alternatives  have  been  reasonably  considered  and 
exhausted  prior  to  the  use  of  deadly  force,  to  include  disengagement. 
Deadly  force  in  response  to  the  subject’s  actions  must  remain 
reasonable while based upon the totality of the circumstances known to 
the officer at the time force was applied. 
 

DE-ESCALATION 

 

Policing  requires  that  at  times  an  officer  must  exercise  control  of  a  violent  or  resisting 
subject  to  make  an  arrest,  or  to  protect  the  officer,  other  officers,  or  members  of  the 
community  from  risk  of  imminent  harm.  Clearly,  not  every  potential  violent  confrontation 
can  be  de-escalated,  but  officers  do  have  the  ability  to  impact  the  direction  and  the 

 

1159 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 
outcome of many situations they handle, based on their decision-making and the tactics 
they choose to employ. 
 
When  reasonable  under  the  totality  of  circumstances,  officers  should  gather  information 
about the incident, assess the risks, assemble resources, attempt to slow momentum, and 
communicate  and  coordinate  a  response.    In  their  interaction  with  subjects,  officers 
should use advisements, warnings, verbal persuasion, and other tactics and alternatives to 
higher  levels  of  force.  Officers  should  recognize  that  they  may  withdraw  to  a  position 
that  is  tactically  more  secure  or  allows  them  greater  distance  in  order  to  consider  or 
deploy a greater variety of Force Options. Officers shall perform their work in a manner 
that  avoids  unduly  jeopardizing  their  own  safety  or  the  safety  of  others  through  poor 
tactical decisions.  
 
The  prospect  of  a  favorable  outcome  is  often  enhanced  when  supervisors  become 
involved  in  the  management  of  an  overall  response  to  potential  violent  encounters  by 
coordinating  resources  and  officers’  tactical  actions.  Supervisors  should  possess  a  good 
knowledge  of  tactics  and  ensure  that  officers  under  their  supervision  perform  to  a 
standard. As a good practice, supervisors will acknowledge and respond to incidents in a 
timely manner where law enforcement use of force is probable. (4/14, 5/14)■ 
 
6/002.02 

AUTHORIZED  FORCE  TOOLS  DESCRIPTION,  REQUIREMENTS,  USES  AND 
CONSIDERATIONS 

Presence and Verbal Communication:  
Empty Hand Tactics: 
Handcuffs, flexible handcuffs, or other restraint devices: 
Baton/Impact Weapons: 
 Oleoresin Capsicum Spray: 
Lateral Vascular Neck Restraint®: 
Electronic Control Device:   
Use of Canine 
Use of Force with a Vehicle 
a.
b.
c.
d.
Use of Force with a Firearm 

Precision Intervention Technique: 

Ramming 

Blocking 

a. Low Lethality Shotguns  
b. Handgun/Shotgun (“OO” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 
c. Deployment of Rifles  

Stationary Vehicle Immobilization Technique (Pinching) 

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

X.

 

With  minimal  exception,  only  department-approved  weapons  and  training  techniques  shall 
be used.   Uniformed officers will carry all issued tools and equipment required by the 

1160 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 
policies of this agency. Officers should note that less lethal tools may result in a lethal 
outcome, or be ineffective even when used appropriately. 
 
Non-uniformed  commissioned  personnel  the  rank of  lieutenant  and  below  are  required  to 
carry  at  least  one  intermediate  force  option  -  baton,  OC  spray,  or  ECD  –  on  their 
person  when  on-duty  unless  the  requirement  is  waived,  via  completion  of  LVMPD  Form 
483, by their division commander.   
 
Supervisors  of  commissioned  personnel  will  ensure  their  subordinates  complete  their 
minimum  required  hours  of  training  within  the  calendar  year.  Officers  completing  an 
academy  during  the  calendar  year  are  exempt  from  the  minimum  hour  requirement. 
Defensive  tactics  proficiency  testing  will  be  required  for  the  quarter  following  graduation 
from an academy. 
 
If  the  employee  fails  to  demonstrate  proficiency,  the  employee  and/or  the  employee’s 
supervisor  will  contact  the  Organizational  Development  Bureau/DSD  Training  as  soon  as 
practicable for assistance in formulating a remedial training program.  
 
The  following  are  authorized  force  tools/restraints  and  techniques  which  may  be  used 
when  objectively  reasonable  and  otherwise  permitted  under  this  policy.  Specialized  units 
may have additional tools that are not covered in this policy. 
 

I. Presence and Verbal Communication:  

Level of Control:   

Low Level Force  

 
Approved Use: 

  

II. Empty Hand Tactics:   
Level of Control:   

Officers  will,  when  and  to  the  extent  reasonably  possible,  attempt  to  use 
verbal  communication  skills  to  control  subjects  before  resorting  to  physical 
control methods.  

Low Level Force – takedowns (not likely to cause injury), escorts  
Intermediate Level Force - takedown, strikes, kicking 
Deadly Force - takedown, strikes, kicking 

 
Certification/POST Requirements: 

academies. 

1.  Entry  level  training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 

2.  Annual  Training  -  Two  hours  of  Defensive  Tactics  training  per  quarter  for 
lieutenants  and  below.  NV  POST  requires  officers  must  participate  in  8 
hours  of  Defensive  Tactics  training  per  year  and  demonstrate  proficiency 
with each tactic/tool they are authorized to use.   

 

1161 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Approved Use: 

1.  These  tactics  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and 

department training. 

2.  Officers  should  only  use  tactics  appropriate  to  the  situation  which 

have been taught by department Defensive Tactics instructors. 

 
Additional Considerations:   

Summon  medical  attention  on  use  of  an  Empty  Hand  Tactic  and/or  any 
incident where a subject is injured and/or complains of injury. 
 
All  strikes,  punches,  kicks,  and/or  any  incident  where  a  subject  is  injured  or 
complains of injury is a reportable Use of Force Report in Blue Team. 
 

III. Handcuffs, flexible handcuffs, or other restraint devices:   

Level of Control:  

Low Level Force 

 
Description: 

Officers will only use department-authorized or issued handcuffs.  
  

Certification/POST Requirements: 

1.  Entry  level  training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 

academies. 

2.  Two  hours  of  Defensive  Tactics  training  per  quarter  for  lieutenants  and 
below.  NV  POST  requires  officers  participate  in  8  hours  of  Defensive 
Tactics  training  per  year  and  demonstrate  proficiency  with  each  tactic/tool 
they are authorized to use. 

 
Inspection Requirement:  

Handcuffs will be maintained in clean and working order.  
 

Approved Use: 

1.  This  tool  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and  department 

2. 

training. 
In  an  attempt  to  minimize  the  risk  of  injury  to  officers  and  others  during 
arrest  situations,  officers  will  handcuff  all  persons  arrested  as  soon  as 
possible. 

3.  During  investigative  detentions  (“Terry  Stops”)  where  one  or  more  of  the 
following  factors  is  present:    Note:  Investigative  detentions  cannot  exceed 
60 minutes pursuant to NRS 171.123.  
a. 
b. 

Articulable facts that the subject is physically uncooperative; 
Articulable  facts  that  a  subject’s  actions  at  the  scene  may 

1162 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

c. 

d. 
e. 

f. 

g. 

h. 

a. 

b. 

present physical danger to themselves or others if not restrained; 

Reasonable  possibility  of  flight  based  on  the  action  of  the 

 

subject; 

Information that the subject is currently armed; 
The  stop  closely  follows  a  violent  crime  and  the  subject 

matches specific parts of a description; 

When  there  are  articulable  facts  that  a  crime  of  violence  is 

about to occur; 

Care  and  discretion  should  be  used  at  extremes  of  age  in 

handcuffing an individual during an investigative detention. 

The  authority  to  handcuff  during  investigatory  stops  continues 

for only as long as the circumstances above exist.   

At a private residence as is reasonably necessary to execute 

the warrant in safety; 

At a commercial business open to the public if it reasonably 
appears that handcuffing is necessary to protect an officer or others 
from  physical  harm.  Circumstances  which  may  justify  initial 
handcuffing may change and eliminate continued justification; 

4.  Suicidal persons; 
5.  During a search warrant service; 

6.  Persons being transported to detoxification facilities; 
7.  By detention personnel moving in-custody subjects. 

 

Disapproved Use: 

If  medical  circumstances  make  it  unreasonable  to  handcuff  an  arrestee, 
officers will refrain from handcuffing. 

2.  When  responding  to  a  security  office  where  a  subject  has  already  been 
placed in handcuffs prior to arriving to the  scene, officers shall not place 
LVMPD  handcuffs  on  the  subject  until  they  have  reasonable  suspicion  or 
probable cause based on their independent investigation and/or findings. 

1. 

 

Tactical Considerations: 

1.  Officers  will  check  handcuffs  for  tightness  and  double  lock  as  soon  as  it 

is safe to do so prior to transport.   

2.  When  a  handcuffed  subject  first  complains  that  handcuffs  are  too  tight 
and/or are hurting the subject, the officer having custody of the handcuffed 
subject will, as soon as reasonably possible, check the handcuffs to make 
sure  that  they  are  not  too  tight.  If  they  are  too  tight  (per  training),  they 
will be loosened and double locked. 

 
Additional Considerations: 

 
Summon  medical  attention  on  use  of  Handcuffs  or  other  restraint  devices 
and/or any incident where a subject is injured and/or complains of injury. 

 

1163 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 
Any incident where a subject is injured or complains of injury is a reportable 
Use of Force Report in Blue Team. 
 

D. 

Baton/Impact Weapons:   
 
Level of Control:   

Low Level Force - when used as an escort tool 
Intermediate Force - when used for jabbing or striking 
Deadly Force - striking subjects on the head, neck, sternum, spine, groin, or 
kidneys 

 
Description: 

1.  A  baton  is  a  department-authorized  expandable  straight  baton  or 

side handle baton.   

2.  All  commissioned  police  personnel  the  rank  of  lieutenant  and 
below must obtain certification training and carry the baton when 
in an approved LVMPD uniform (see 4/107.00).  

3.  Plain  clothes  officers  are  required  to  carry  either  OC  spray,  an 

ECD, or an expandable straight baton. 

  

Certification/POST Requirements: 

academies. 

3.  Entry  level  training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 

4.  All  officers,  in  the  rank  of  lieutenant  and  below,  shall  complete  the 

following requirements: 
a.  Receives initial baton training in the academy; or 
b.  Receives a minimum of eight (8) hours of initial PR-24 (AL or FX) or 
a minimum of four (4) hours of initial expandable straight baton training 
by an LVMPD certified Defensive Tactics Instructor. 

3.  Annual  Training  -  Two  hours  of  Defensive  Tactics  training  per 
quarter for lieutenants and below. Nevada POST requires officers 
participate in 8 hours of Defensive Tactics training per year and 
demonstrate  proficiency  with  each  tactic/tool  they  are  authorized 
to use.   

Batons will be maintained in clean and working order. 

 
Inspection Requirement: 

 
Approved Use: 

training. 

1.  This  tool  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and  department 

2.  Blocking, jabbing, to apply control holds, or passive/active escort techniques 

(Example: stirring the pot). 

1164 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 
Disapproved Use: 

or impact tool. 

1.  A  subject  who  poses  no  imminent  threat  will  not  be  struck  with  a  baton 

2.  Officers are discouraged from using their firearm as an impact tool due to 

the possibility of an unintentional discharge. 

3.  During non-deadly force incidents, officers will use reasonable care to avoid 
striking  subjects  on  the  head,  neck,  sternum,  spine,  groin,  or  kidneys,  as 
these strikes may constitute deadly force. 

4.  The use of instruments as a weapon for the purpose of striking or jabbing 
(i.e.,  flashlights,  radio,  etc.)  other  than  department-authorized  batons,  is 
strongly  discouraged  and  acceptable  only  when  other  authorized  force 
responses have been exhausted and are either unavailable or ineffective.   
5.  Officers  must  be  able  to  articulate  a  compelling  need  to  use  any  other 
device or object other than an authorized baton as an impact weapon.  

 
Additional Considerations: 

Summon  medical  attention  on  all  strikes  with  a  Baton/Impact  weapon  and/or 
any incident where a subject is injured and/or complains of injury. 
 
Notify a supervisor when a Baton/Impact weapon has been used. 
 
Use of the baton for escort/control or “stirring the pot” is non-reportable. 
 
All  strikes  or  any  incident  where  a  subject  is  injured  and/or  complains  of 
injury is a reportable Use of Force Report in Blue Team. 
 

V. Oleoresin Capsicum Spray: 

 
Level of Control: 

Intermediate Force 

 
Description: 

1.  OC spray is a non-lethal agent which causes inflammation of the skin and 
mucus membrane of  a subject and has a  natural base as opposed to a 
chemical base.  

2.  All  commissioned  police  personnel  the  rank  of  lieutenant  and  below  must 
obtain  certification  training  and  carry  OC  spray  when  in  an  approved 
LVMPD uniform (see 4/107.00).   

3.  Plain  clothes  officers  are  required  to  carry  OC  spray,  an  ECD,  or  an 

expandable straight baton. 

 
Certification/POST Requirements: 

 

1165 

1.  Entry  level  training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

academies. 

 

2.  Annual  Training  -  Two  hours  of  Defensive  Tactics  training  per  quarter  for 
lieutenants and below. Nevada POST requires officers participate in 8 hours 
of  Defensive  Tactics  training  per  year  and  demonstrate  proficiency  with 
each tactic/tool they are authorized to use.   

 
Inspection Requirement: 

 
Deployment Requirement: 

OC spray expiration date and serviceability will be checked. 

1.  When  deploying,  an  officer  will,  if  practical,  announce  a  warning  to  the 
subject  and  other  officers  of  the  intent  to  deploy  the  OC  spray  if  the 
subject does not comply with your commands.  

Example, “Do what I am telling you to do, or I will spray you with 

2.  Officer shall give the subject a reasonable opportunity to voluntarily comply.  

pepper spray.” 

 
Approved Use: 

1.  OC  Spray  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and 

department training. 

2.  OC spray may be used when subject is engaging or displays the intent to 

engage in aggressive resistant behavior which may cause injury.  

3.  OC  spray  may  be  used  on  vicious  or  aggressive  animals  when  those 

animals interfere with the safety of the officers or citizens. 

4.  OC spray may only be used in a protest or demonstration situation when 
authorized  by  an  incident  commander  in  response  to  imminent  threat  of 
harm.  

Disapproved Use: 
1. 

Shall  not  be  used  on  a  subject  inside  a  closed  vehicle, 
unless an officer is attempting to secure an aggressive resistant subject in 
a patrol vehicle.  OC is not intended to be used to force extraction from 
an  enclosed  area,  unless  utilized  in  a  detention  facility.  (See  DSD  SOP 
09.11.01 Use of Force)  
Shall not be used on passive resistant protestors. 
Shall not be used other than as an aerosol/stream. 
Shall not be used on a handcuffed subject unless the subject is displaying 
Aggressive Resistance.   

2. 
3. 
4. 

 
Tactical Considerations: 

subject. 

1.  Whenever  possible,  should  be  used  upwind  and  relatively  close  to  the 

2.  High capacity OC spray may be used as an intermediate level of control; 
however, officers will assess the effect the device will have on subjects in 

1166 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

the general area due to the volume of agent dispersed.   

 

 
Supervisory Consideration: 

 
Additional Considerations: 

Incident  commander  may  authorize  use  in  a  protest  or  demonstration  incident 
in response to imminent threat of harm. 

Summon medical attention on all use of OC Spray and/or any incident where 
a subject is injured and/or complains of injury. 
 
Notify a supervisor when OC Spray has been used. 
 
Inform  detention  personnel  the  subject  has  been  exposed  to  OC  Spray  and 
ensure they have been screened by the detention facility medical staff.  
 
The use of OC Spray on a subject is a reportable Use of Force Report in 
Blue Team. 
 
Note:  In  addition  to  the  above,  when  OC  Spray  is  used  by  a  civilian 
department  member  a  patrol  officer  and  supervisor  will  respond  to  the  scene 
to assist with enforcement action.  

F. Lateral Vascular Neck Restraint®: 

 
There  are  three  levels  to  applying  the  LVNR®.   Level  One  begins  with  Low 
Level Force and may progress to the Intermediate based on the subject’s actions. 
 
Level of Control:  

Low Level Force --   LVNR® Level One (minimum restraint) 
 
Intermediate Force --   LVNR® Level Two (medium restraint) 

     

LVNR® Level Three (maximum restraint) 

 
Description:  

The LVNR® is a control technique in which the carotid arteries on the sides 
of  the  neck  are  compressed,  restricting  blood  flow  to  the  brain,  causing  the 
subject to pass out. 

 
Certification/POST Requirements: 

1.  Entry  Level  Training  is  provided  in  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 
academies.  No officer will use the LVNR® without first completing the 12-
hour certification course provided in the academy. 

2.  Training will be provided by certified LVNR® instructors only.  
3.  All  commissioned  officers  the  rank  of  lieutenant  and  below  will  receive 

1167 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

training in the LVNR®.  

 

4.  Officers certified in the LVNR® will be required to complete four hours of 

recertification training through quarterly defensive tactics.  

a.  Any  officer  requesting  an  exemption  from  LVNR®  training  due  to 
medical  reasons  must  obtain  a  medical  exemption  from  their 
physician.  

b.  This  exemption  must  be  obtained  immediately  upon  requesting  the 
exemption  and  at  the  beginning  of  each  calendar  year  thereafter, 
and be forwarded to the Director of Risk Management.  

 
Approved Use: 

1.  This  tool  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and 

department training. 

2.  The  LVNR®  is  a  defensive  tactic  to  quickly  and  safely  stop 

active/aggressive resistance.  

 

Disapproved Use: 

1.  Will  not  be  used  on  subjects  that  have  been  exposed  to  OC  spray  or 

who are experiencing difficulty breathing.   

2.  Officers  will  not  use  any  other  arm  bar  technique  that  involves  a  neck 

1.  When  applying  the  LVNR®,  only  the  amount  of  force  necessary  to 

bring the subject under control will be used.  

2.  Upon  the  subject  being  brought  under  control  the  LVNR®  will  be 

restraint. 

 
Tactical Considerations: 

relaxed. 

Additional Considerations: 

Summon medical attention on all use of LVNR®, and/or any incident where a 
subject is injured and/or complains of injury. 
 
Notify a supervisor when LVNR® has been attempted or used. 
 
Inform detention personnel LVNR® has been applied on the subject and 
ensure they have been screened by the detention facility medical staff.  
 
Any application of LVNR® on a subject is a reportable Use of Force Report 
in Blue Team. 

G.  Electronic Control Device:   

 
All commissioned personnel at the rank of lieutenant and below must obtain initial 
ECD  certification  training,  and  annual  recertification.    Sergeants  and  below,  who 

1168 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

are issued an ECD, must carry the device when in an approved LVMPD uniform 
(including  overtime  assignments;  see  4/107.00),  excluding  NYE,  9/11  or  any  other 
Special Events as stated in the IAP for the Event.   
 
Level of Control: 

Intermediate Force  

 
Description: 

1.  The ECD is a Neuro-Muscular Incapacitation (NMI) device that disrupts the 
body’s  ability  to  communicate  messages  from  the  brain  to  the  muscles 
thereby causing temporary NMI.  
a. 

An air cartridge is a replaceable cartridge for the ECD which 
uses compressed nitrogen to fire two barbed probes on thin connecting 
wires, sending a high voltage/low current signal into a subject. 

2.  Use of the ECD Camera  

a.  Some  ECDs  are  equipped  with  a  video  camera  and  audio  recording 

device.  

b.  Any and all images, video, and/or audio generated by the ECD camera 
are the sole property of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department. 
No  video  and/or  audio  may  be  downloaded  unless  obtained  in  the 
course  of  official  duties.  No  material  produced  by  the  ECD  cameras 
may be reproduced, uploaded to non-departmental websites, or otherwise 
disseminated without authorization from the Sheriff or his designee. 

c.  When  an  officer  leaves  the  Patrol  Division,  the  ECD  camera  must  be 

turned into the Supply Section.     

 
Certification/POST Requirements: 
1. 

corrections academies. 

Entry  Level  Training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Defensive Tactics instructors who have been certified as ECD 

instructors will be the only authorized persons to instruct on the ECD.   

Officers authorized to use an ECD must successfully complete 
an initial six-hour certification training course, to include written and practical 
tests.   

Once certified, all officers, regardless of issuance of an ECD, 
must  annually  attend  four-hour  recertification  training  taught  by  the  AOST 
Staff.   

If  the  employee  fails  to  demonstrate  proficiency  at  any  time, 
the  employee  and/or  the  employee’s  supervisor  will  contact  the  Training 
Section for assistance in formulating a remedial training program. 

 
Inspection Requirement: 
1. 

Officers  will  use  only  authorized  ECD  equipment  issued  by 
the  LVMPD.  The  ECD  will  be  inspected  for  damage  and  cleanliness,  and 

 

1169 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

batteries  and  cartridges  replaced  by  the  officer  when  required.  The  ECD 
will  be  inspected  and  maintained  in  accordance  with  training  protocols. 
When  off  duty,  ECDs  must  be  stored  and  secured  in  a  climate-controlled 
area (i.e. locker), not in a vehicle.  
2.  Officers  must  conduct  a  spark  check,  outside  the  public  view,  at  the 
beginning of shift to ensure the ECD will function properly. This spark 
check does not require completion of a Use of Force Report.  

Uniformed  officers  will  carry  the  ECD  in  a  department 
approved holster. The holster will be carried on the duty belt, on the side 
opposite  the  duty  firearm.  Cross-draw  position  is  optional.  Plain  clothes 
officers, who are issued an ECD, will carry the device on their weak side. 
Officers  have  the  option  of  carrying  the  standard  DPM  or  the  X-DPM 
which is an extended version, capable of carrying a spare ECD cartridge. 

3. 

 
Deployment Requirement: 

1.  When  displaying  an  ECD,  officers  will  give  a  warning,  when  practical,  to 

the subject and other officers before firing the ECD.  

Example: “Do what I am telling you to do or I will taze you and it 

will hurt.” 

2.  Officer shall give the subject a reasonable opportunity to voluntarily comply. 

 
Note:  Officers  should  be  aware  of  the  higher  risk  of  sudden  death  which 
may  exist  in  subjects  under  the  influence  of  illicit  drugs  and/or  exhibiting 
symptoms associated with excited delirium. In addition, once a subject has 
received an ECD application; officers should be aware of the potential for 
impaired  breathing  during  restraint  procedures.  If  the  subject  is  thought  to 
be experiencing impaired breathing, they should be placed on their side to 
reduce  the  risk  of  aspiration.  Severely  impaired  breathing  could  result  in 
death. 
 
Approved Use: 

1.  This  tool  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and 

department training. 

2.  The  ECD  is  an  Intermediate  Level  of  Control  and  may  be  used  when 

there is an imminent threat of physical harm. 

 
Disapproved Use: 

1.  Officers are not authorized to draw or display the ECD except for training 
and  inspection,  unless  the  circumstances  create  a  reasonable  belief  that 
use  may  be  necessary.    The  ECD  will  be  handled  in  the  same  manner 
as a firearm and will be secured prior to entering any detention facility.  
2.  The  intentional  use  of  more  than  one  ECD  simultaneously  on  the  same 

subject is prohibited. 

3.  The ECD will not be used: 

1170 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

a.  When the officer knows a subject has come in contact with flammable 

liquids or is in a flammable atmosphere; 

b.  When  the  subject  is  in  a  position  where  a  fall  may  result  in  serious 

bodily harm or death; 

c.  Punitively for purposes of coercion or in an unjustified manner; 
d.  To escort or jab individuals; 
e.  To awaken unconscious or intoxicated individuals;  
f.  When  the  subject  is  visibly  pregnant,  unless  deadly  force  is  the  only 

other option; 

4. 

5. 

g.  When the subject is in handcuffs or waist restraints;  
h.  When  a  subject  displays  solely  Passive  or  Active  Resistance  (i.e. 
peaceful protest, refusal to stand, non-aggressive verbal resistance, etc.); 
i.  When a subject is fleeing as the sole justification for use of the ECD. 
The  ECD should  not  be  used in  the  following  circumstances 
unless  there  are  compelling  reasons  to  do  so  which  can  be  clearly 
articulated: 

a.  When the subject is operating a motor vehicle; 
b.  When the subject is holding a firearm; 
c.  When  the  subject  is  at  the  extremes  of  age  (elderly  and  young  children) 

or physically disabled; 

d.  In a situation where deadly force is clearly justifiable unless another officer 
is present and capable of providing deadly force to protect the officers 
and/or others as necessary. 

Use of the ECD Camera:  

a.  The ECD camera will not be used as a simple recording device.   
b.  The ECD camera may only be used for official law enforcement business.  

Any  use  of  the  ECD  camera  video  or  audio  that  is  not  in  the 
performance of official duties is strictly prohibited. 

 
Tactical Considerations: 

1.  There are three types of reportable ECD applications: 

a.  Spark  Display  -  A  non-contact  demonstration  of  the  ECD’s  ability  to 

discharge electricity. 

b. 

c. 

Touch  Stun  -  A  pain  compliance  application  of  the  ECD  without  a 
cartridge intended to gain compliance of a subject or used to complete 
a circuit by making direct contact with the body after the air cartridge 
has  been  expended  or  removed.    Note:  Use  of  the  ECD  as  a  pain-
compliance tool is discouraged.  

Probe  Mode  -  When  the  ECD  cartridge  is  fired  at  a  subject  with 
the intent that the subject be temporarily immobilized for the period of 
time  the  ECD  is  cycled.  Proper  application  will  result  in  temporary 
immobilization  of  the  subject  and  provide  the  officer  a  “window  of 
opportunity” in which to take the subject safely into custody. 

2.  For a frontal shot, reasonable effort should be made to target lower center 

 

1171 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

mass  and  avoid  intentionally  targeting  the  head,  neck,  groin  and  chest.  It 
is  recognized  that  the  dynamics  of  each  situation  and  officer  safety  may 
not  permit  the  officer  to  limit  the  application  of  the  ECD  probes  to  a 
precise  target  area. Back  shots  are  the  preferred  target  area  when 
practical. 

 
3.  When deploying an ECD, officers will: 
a. 

Initial use of the ECD shall be a standard five-second cycle, and then 
the  officer  will  evaluate  the  need  to  apply  a  second  five-second  cycle 
after  providing  the  subject  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  comply.  Each 
subsequent five-second cycle requires separate justification based on the 
objectively reasonable standard of Graham v. Connor. Once the subject 
has  been  exposed  to  three  cycles,  the  ECD  shall  be  deemed 
ineffective  and  another  use  of  force  option  will  be  considered,  unless 
exigent circumstances exist;  

Begin  control  and  restraint  procedures,  including  cuffing  under 
power, as soon as is reasonably safe and practical to do so in order 
to  minimize  the  total  duration  of  ECD  exposure(s).  The  device  user, 
and  those  assisting  the  user,  should  avoid  touching  the  probes,  wires, 
and the areas between the probes to avoid accidental shock during the 
electrical discharge; 

The use of “touch stun” mode should only be used to supplement 
Probe Mode to complete the Neuro-Muscular Incapacitation (NMI) effect. 
The ECD “touch stun” mode requires the same level of justification as 
probe deployment.  

b. 

c. 

Summon medical attention on all use of the ECD, and/or any incident where 
a subject is injured and/or complains of injury. 
 
Notify a supervisor when ECD has been used (Spark Display, Probe or Touch 
Stun). 
 
Inform  detention  personnel  an  ECD  has been  used  on  the  subject  (Probe  or 
Touch  Stun)  and  ensure  they  have  been  screened  by  the  detention  facility 
medical staff.  
 
Any use of ECD on a subject is a reportable Use of Force Report in Blue 
Team with the only exception being a spark check out of public view. Note: 
Any  accidental  discharge  of  an  ECD  other  than  at  a  subject  will  be 
documented on an Officer’s Report.  

If the subject is thought to be experiencing impaired breathing, they should be 
placed on their side to reduce the risk of aspiration. 

1172 

 
Additional Considerations 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 

I. Use of Canine 

 
Level of Control: 
Low Level  
Intermediate Force  
 

Certification/POST Requirements: 

1.  All police service dogs will be initially certified.   
2.  Patrol  dogs  will  be  re-certified  on  a  quarterly  basis,  while 

detector dogs will be re-certified on a semi-annual basis.   

 
Inspection Requirement: 

 
Deployment Requirement:  

 
Approved Use: 

Maintenance  training  with  the  Canine  team  should  occur  on  a  daily  basis  to 
ensure the training standards are maintained.  

Canine teams can be requested through Communications, 24 hours a day, and 
7  days  a  week.   A  Canine  team  may  need  to  be  called  out  upon  the 
approval of the section lieutenant or his designee. 

1.  Canine is approved when there is probable cause to believe a subject has 
committed a crime or is a danger to themselves or others, and when the 
subject  is  actively  evading  efforts  to  take  them  into  custody  and  the  use 
of  a  canine  would  reduce  risk  to  officers  or  the  public.  Canine  will  be 
used  only  in  accordance  with  policy,  department  training,  and  Graham  v. 
Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989).   

 

Disapproved Use:   

Since  the  use  of  police  dogs  may  inflame  an  already  volatile  situation,  it  is 
the policy of this department to place limitations on the use of police dogs in 
crowd  control,  civil  disorders,  or  riot  situations.    In  the  event  of  such  an 
occurrence,  the  canine  teams  may  be  dispatched  to  the  problem  area  in  a 
standby  status.    They  would  be  utilized  only  when  authorized  by  the  field 
lieutenant  in  charge  of  the  scene  in  a  dire  emergency.  Such  an  emergency 
would  be  for  crowd  control  in  conjunction  with  an  all-out  police  effort  to 
rescue isolated officers or citizens in danger of being injured or killed. 

 
Tactical Considerations: 

1. 

In  police  operations,  canine  handlers  are  in  charge  and  responsible  for 
their dogs’ deployment.  

2.  When  it  is  believed  a  subject  may  be  armed  with  a  weapon  likely  to 
cause injury or death to the police service dog, the handler may exercise 

 

1173 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

his/her discretion before deploying the dog. 

 

3.  Risk  to  Third  Parties:  In  using  police  service  dogs,  the  canine  handler 
shall  exercise  reasonable  care  to  avoid  unnecessary  risk  of  injury  to 
persons who are not the subject of a search or apprehension. 

4.  When  cover  officers  accompany  canine  handlers  during  searches,  they 
should  stay  with  the  handler  during  a  search  and  not  move  or  run  past 
the  canine  team  unless  directed  to  do  so.    Cover  officers  should  watch 
for dangers, make citizen contacts and let canine handlers issue commands 
to a subject. The canine handlers will let the cover officers know when it 
is safe to apprehend a subject. 
 

Summon medical attention on all bites, and/or any incident where a subject is 
injured and/or complains of injury. 
 
Notify  a  supervisor  when  a  subject  or  person  has  been  bitten  by  a  police 
service dog. 
 
Inform detention personnel the subject has been bitten by a police service dog 
and ensure they have been screened by the detention facility medical staff.  
 
Any  use  of  a  Canine  with  bites  on  a  subject  is  a  reportable  Use  of  Force 
Report in Blue Team. Note: Any injury caused by a police service dog to a 
person  who  was  not  the  subject  of  the  search  will  be  documented  in  an 
Officer’s Report.  

Additional Considerations: 

L. Use of Force with a vehicle:  

Blocking 
Stationary Vehicle Immobilization Technique (Pinching) 
Precision Intervention Technique (PIT) 
Ramming 

Level of Control: 

 
Blocking & Pinching - Low Level Force 
 
PIT-Intermediate Force - At speeds 40mph or below  

 Deadly Force – In the following instances: 
1. 
2. 
3. 

At speeds of more than 40mph; 
When used on motorcycles; 
When  used  on  high  center  of  gravity  vehicles  likely  to  roll 

over, such as vans, SUVs, and jeeps; 

4. 

In  circumstances  creating  a  substantial  risk  of  death  or 

serious bodily injury. 

1174 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Ramming- Deadly Force regardless of speed 

 

 
Description: 
 

Blocking-  is  the  positioning  of  a  police  vehicle  in  the  path  of  an  occupied 
subject  vehicle  where  contact  between  the  vehicles  is  not  anticipated  or  is 
anticipated to be minimal.  In circumstances where the officer initiates contact 
it  is  a  reportable  use  of  force.    In  the  use  of  blocking,  the  potential  for 
injuries and vehicle damages are low.  If the subject initiates contact, this will 
be investigated as an incident 
 
Pinching-  is  a  pre-planned  containment  tactic  that  uses  low-speed,  intentional 
vehicle  contact  with  a  subject’s  vehicle.  This  tactic  is  limited  for  use  by 
specialized units with Bureau Commander’s approval and training. The purpose 
is  to  render  a  vehicle  immobile  so  that  subjects  can  be  taken  into  custody.  
Patrol officers may use a blocking technique. 
 
PIT- is a specific manner of intentional contact using a police vehicle against 
a fleeing vehicle to cause the fleeing vehicle to come to a stop.  
 
Ramming- is the use of a vehicle to intentionally hit another vehicle. 

 
Certification/POST Requirements: 
 

Pinching: 
1.  Personnel assigned to an approved unit intending to use this technique for 
a  preplanned  apprehension,  must  re-certify  each  year  by  attending  EVOC 
training in conjunction with PIT training.  

2.  Approval necessary for specialized units to train in and use this technique 
must be given by the specialized unit's bureau commander, and the ODB 
commander. 

3.  Training records for personnel certified in this technique will be maintained 

by the Training Section of ODB. 

PIT: 
 

 

1. 

2. 

Entry  level  training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 
academies. 

Only  commissioned  officers  who  maintain  current  certification 

may use this stopping technique.    

 
Deployment Requirement: 
 

 

1175 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Blocking: The officer has reasonable belief the subject has committed a crime 
and may use the vehicle to flee.  

Pinching:  The  officer  has  a  reasonable  belief  the  subject  has  committed  a 
crime  and  has  been  attempting  to  evade,  or  has  the  potential  to  harm 
themselves or others. 
 
PIT: 

1.  Prior  to  initiating  a  PIT,  officers  will  use  their  emergency  equipment 
(red lights and sirens) and will give the operator of the subject vehicle 
a reasonable opportunity to stop. 

2.  Officers  will  broadcast  through  dispatch  the  intent  to  use  PIT  if 
circumstances permit. Otherwise, notification will be made after the fact. 
 

Ramming:  The  officer  has  reasonable  belief  imminent  threat  of  death  or 
serious bodily injury exists. 

 
Approved Use: 

These  tactics  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and  department 

training. 
 
Blocking:  The  intent  of  blocking  is  to  prevent  the  escape  of  a  subject  by 
utilizing  a  vehicle  to  block  the  path  of  the  occupied  subject  vehicle  when 
contact is not anticipated or probable. 

Pinching:  This  pre-planned  tactic  is  not  approved  for  use  by  Patrol.  May  be 
used  by  specialized  units  who  have  gathered  intelligence  on  a  specific 
subject(s) requiring the application of the tactic based on the subjects potential 
for  violence,  disregard  for  public  safety  and/or  to  prevent  a  potential  vehicle 
pursuit.   

PIT: Circumstances warranting the use of PIT as deadly force are as follows: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Continued  movement  of  the  pursued  vehicle  would  place  others  in 
danger of serious bodily injury or death; and/or 
Apparent risk of harm, to other than the occupants of the pursued 
vehicle, is so great as to outweigh the risk of harm in making the 
forcible stop; and 
Other means of apprehension have been considered and rejected as 
impractical, i.e., continue to follow, stop sticks, call for the air unit. 

Ramming:  To  be  used  when  all  other  means  of  apprehension  have  been 
considered  and  rejected  as  impractical  and/or  an  imminent  threat  of  death  or 
serious bodily injury exists. 

1176 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Disapproved Use: 
 

Pinching: Not approved for use by patrol.  
 
PIT: 

1.  PIT  will  not  be  used  unless  the  subject  demonstrates  he/she  is 
attempting to evade police and the elements necessary for an approved 
Vehicular  Pursuit  (6/014.00)  are  present  (i.e.,  violent  felony  offense  or 
subject presents a clear and immediate danger to the public). 

2.  Officers driving department truck or SUV-type vehicles are not authorized 

to use PIT.   

Ramming:  When  the  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  to  an 
officer or citizen does not exist.  

Tactical Considerations: 
 

Officers  will  consider  the  safety  of  the  public  and  subjects  before  utilizing 
these tactics. 
 
Environmental factors: 

Areas with pedestrians; 
Other vehicle traffic; 
Parked vehicles; 
Telephone/utility poles; 
Bridges; 
Areas adjacent to paved roads with a large elevation change. 

Subject factors:  

Seriousness of the crime; 
Number of subjects; 
Subject(s) known to have or has access to firearms; 
Potential of the subject to use the vehicle as a weapon; 
Potential  of  a  tactical  disadvantage  due  to  close  proximity  of  the 

subject(s); 

Potential of creating a crossfire situation; 
Size/weight of the subjects vehicle compared to the police vehicle 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

f. 
g. 

 
Supervisory Consideration: 

 

Blocking: Utilized to prevent the escape of a subject in a vehicle.  
 
Pinching:  

1.  Supervisors  assigned  to  units  authorized  to  use  this  technique  will 

1177 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

ensure  all  personnel  operating  LVMPD  vehicles  in  a  Stationary  Vehicle 
Immobilization employment are current on annual certifications.  

2.  Order  discontinuation  of  the  pinch  when  the  necessity  for  apprehension 

is outweighed by the dangers of the pinch. 

3.  Ensure  this  is  the  best  tactic  and  that  other  reasonable  options  have 

been considered. 

PIT: 

1. 

 

 

Immediately  acknowledge  notification  over  the  radio,  and  assume 
responsibility for controlling PIT; 

2.  Order discontinuation of the PIT when the necessity for apprehension is 

outweighed by the dangers of the PIT; 

3.  Consider use of other options. 

Ramming:  When  the  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious  bodily  injury  to  an 
officer or citizen does not exist.  
 

Additional Considerations: 

Summon  medical  attention  on  all  incidents  involving  use  of  force  with  a 
vehicle  and/or  any  incident  where  a  subject  is  injured  and/or  complains  of 
injury. 
 
Notify a supervisor on any use of force with a vehicle.  
 
Blocking with contact of a vehicle that is occupied is a reportable Use of 
Force Report in Blue Team.  
 
Blocking with contact of an unoccupied vehicle, or a subject’s vehicle 
unintentionally touches the patrol vehicle; the contact will be reported as a 
traffic incident, LVMPD 42, Vehicle Incident Report. 
 
Pinching is a reportable Use of Force Report in Blue Team. In addition the 
contact between the vehicles will be reported as a traffic incident, LVMPD 42, 
Vehicle Incident Report. 
 
PIT  (successful  uses,  attempts  and/or  declared  uses)  is  a  reportable  Use  of 
Force  Report  in  Blue  Team.  In  addition  a  Pursuit  Report  in  Blue  Team  is 
required when PIT was used during a pursuit. 
 
Ramming  regardless  of  speed  is  a  reportable  Use  of  Force  Report  in  Blue 
Team. 
 

D. Use of Force with a Firearms  

Handgun/Shotgun (Low Lethality, “00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

1178 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Intermediate Force - when fired at a distance of five yards or greater.  
Deadly Force - when fired at a distance less than five yards.  

 
Level of Control: 

 
Low Lethality Shotgun 

 
Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

Deadly Force - Shots fired  

 
Description:  

Low Lethality Shotgun - Low lethality shotguns are department-issued Remington 
870 shotguns with the fore end and stock colored orange. The ammunition 
is a 12 gauge, drag stabilized, less lethal round.  

 
Handgun/Shotgun  (“00”  Buck  &  Slug)/Rifle  -  See  policy  5/208.02  Authorized 

Firearms and Associated Equipment 

 
Certification/POST Requirements: 

1.  Entry  level  training  is  taught  at  the  LVMPD  police  and  corrections 

academies. 

2.  Low Lethality Shotgun-Re-qualify annually.  
3.  Handgun/Shotgun  (“00”  Buck  &  Slug)/Rifle-See  policy  5/108.14  Firearms 

Ensure weapon is clean and functional at all times; 

(cid:120)  Ensure  shotgun  is  only  loaded  with  department  issued  low  lethality 

 
Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

(cid:120)  Ensure  weapon  is  loaded  with  department  duty  ammunition  and  not 

(cid:120)  Officer  is  responsible  to  know  how  many  rounds  are  loaded  in  the 

mixed with practice ammunition; 

firearm and each magazine(s). 

Training 

 
Inspection Requirement: 

 

Low Lethality Shotgun 

munitions. 

 
Deployment Requirement: 
 

Low Lethality Shotgun 
1. 

Prior  to  firing  a  low  lethality  shotgun,  when  feasible,  the 
officer will announce a warning to the subject and other officers of the 
intent  to  deploy  the  low  lethality  shotgun  if  the  subject  does  not 

 

1179 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

comply with commands.  

 

Example: “Police!  Do what I am telling you to do, or I will shoot 
you with a bean bag, and it will hurt.”  

2.  Officer  shall  give  the  subject  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  voluntarily 

comply.  

3.  Two officers must be present if a low lethality shotgun is deployed.  
 

Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

1.  Before  using  a  firearm,  officers  will,  whenever  feasible,  identify 

themselves and state their intention to shoot.   
Example:  “Police!  Stop or I’ll shoot!” 

2.  Officer  shall  give  the  subject  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  voluntarily 

comply.  

 

Rifle Deployment 

1. 

2. 

If  there  is  a  potential  for  deadly  force  an  officer  may  deem  an 
approved  rifle  is  appropriate  based  on  distance,  available  cover,  and 
tactical  situation  presented.  It  is  important  for  an  officer  to  understand 
terminal ballistic capabilities and limitations of the rifle to be deployed. 
It  is  incumbent  on  the  officer  to  use  discretion  when  deploying  and 
displaying  the  rifle,  and  to  only  deploy  the  rifle  when  the  situation 
dictates.  The  officer  must  be  aware  of  the  number  of  rifles  already 
deployed. 

3.  Officer(s) deploying rifle(s) will : 

a.  Announce  intent  to  deploy  the  rifle  via  the  radio  and  receive  an 

acknowledgment from dispatch; 

b.  Whenever  possible,  deploy  the  rifle  using  a  two-officer  team 
consisting  of  a  single  rifle  carrier  supported  by  a  cover  officer  to 
ensure security of the scene; 

c.  Advise  dispatch,  via  the  radio,  of  deployment  location  and  update 
dispatch  and  others  assigned  to  the  event  whenever  deployment 
location  changes,  thus  providing  situational  awareness  to  all 
personnel on-scene of location of deployed rifle(s); 

d.  Advise dispatch, via the radio, of whether or not deploying officer is 

accompanied by a cover officer.   

4.  Communications  will  re-broadcast  that  a  rifle  has  been  deployed  and 

notify the area supervisor of the deployment. 

 
All  firearms  will  be  used  only  in  accordance  with  policy  and  department 

 
Approved Use: 

training 
 

Low Lethality Shotgun 

 

1180 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

1.  The low lethality shotgun should only be used against persons who are 
armed  with  a  weapon  that  could  cause  serious  injury  or  death  to 
themselves  or  others,  or  when  a  subject  poses  an  imminent  threat  to 
the  safety  of  the  officer  or  other  persons.  This  includes,  but  is  not 
limited to: an edged weapon, club, pipe, bottle, brick, etc.   

2.  Officers  are  cautioned  that  the  target  area  for  impact  munitions 
substantially  differs  from  a  deadly  force  target  area.  Instead  of  aiming 
for  center  mass  of  the  body,  the  low  lethality  shotgun  is  aimed  at 
abdomen,  thighs  or  forearms.  The  head,  neck,  and  groin  should  be 
avoided.  
It may be used as an option to deadly force only when circumstances 
allow  the  officer  involved  to  bring  an  incident  to  a  safe  conclusion 
without unnecessary risk to the officers. 

3. 

Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

1.  Officers are to fire their weapons only: 

a.  To  stop  and  incapacitate  a  subject  from  completing  a 

potentially deadly act.     

b.  Protect  themselves  or  others  from  what  is  reasonably 
believed  to  be  an  imminent  threat  of  death  or  serious 
bodily injury.   

c.  To prevent the escape of a fleeing felon who the officer 
has  probable  cause  to  believe  has  committed  a  violent 
felony  crime  and  is  an  imminent  threat  to  human  life  if 
escape  should  occur  (See  NRS  171.1455  and  Tennessee 
v. Garner, 471 U.S. 1(1985)).   

2.  Destroying  Injured  or  Dangerous  Animals  -  Officers  may  destroy  an 

In self-defense; 

injured or dangerous animal under the following circumstances: 
a. 
b.  To prevent serious harm to the officer or others; or  
c.  When  the  animal  is  so  badly  injured  as  to  require  humane  relief 

from further suffering. 

NOTE: A seriously wounded or injured animal may be destroyed only after 
all  attempts  have  been  made  to  request  assistance  from  the  agency 
(Humane  Society,  animal  control,  game  warden,  etc.)  responsible  for  the 
disposal  of  animals.  The  destruction  of  vicious  animals  involves  the  same 
rules set forth for self-defense and the defense and safety of others. (See 
policy 5/109.08 for an exception regarding the Humane Disposal of Animals 
at Resident Locations.)  Also, if the animal’s owner is present, the owner 
will be allowed, at his option, to transport the animal to veterinary care. 

 

 

 
Disapproved Use: 

1181 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Low Lethality Shotgun 
1. 

circumstances  

a. 

b. 

c. 

a. 

b. 

c. 
d. 

The  low  lethality  shotgun  will  not  be  used  in  the  following 

Against  persons  who  are  holding  a  firearm  unless  there  are 
compelling reasons to do so which can be clearly articulated.   
In  a  civil  unrest  situation  unless  authorized  by  a  lieutenant  or 
above, and each application must have a specific targeted individual 
who  presents  an  imminent  threat;  and  it  must  be  reasonably 
assured  that  other  individuals  in  the  crowd  who  pose  no  threat  of 
violence will not be struck by the munitions. 
When  the  subject  is  visibly  pregnant,  unless  deadly  force  is  the 
only other option. 

2. 

The low lethality shotgun should not be used in the following 
circumstances unless there are compelling reasons to do so which can 
be clearly articulated: 

When  the  subject  is  at  the  extremes  of  age  (elderly  and  young 
children) or physically disabled; 
When a subject is in an elevated position where a fall is likely to 
cause serious injury or death; 
When subject is handcuffed or otherwise restrained; 
As a breeching tool. 

Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

2.  Officers are not authorized to draw or display their firearms, except for 
training at an approved firearms range, unless the circumstances create 
reasonable  belief  that  it  may  be  necessary  to  use  the  firearm  in  the 
performance of their duty.   

As warning shots; 

3.  Officers are not authorized to discharge their firearm: 
a. 
b. 
c. 

If it appears likely that an innocent person may be injured; 

Either at or from a moving vehicle, unless it is absolutely necessary 
to do so to protect against imminent threat to the life of the officer 
or  others.  The  imminent  threat  must  be  by  means  other  than  the 
vehicle, itself:  
1)  Officers  will  attempt  to  move  out  of  the  path  of  an  oncoming 

vehicle, if possible, rather than discharge their firearms; 

2)  Officers will not intentionally place themselves in the path of an 
oncoming  vehicle  and  attempt  to  disable  the  vehicle  by 
discharging their firearms; 

3)  Officers  will  not  discharge  their  firearms  at  a  fleeing  vehicle  (a 

vehicle moving away from the officer) or its driver. 

 
Tactical Considerations: 

1182 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 

 

Low Lethality Shotgun 

1.  Officers  should  not  fire  the  low  lethality  shotgun  through  barriers,  such 
as  glass  or  chain  link  fences,  because  the  bag  may  tear  and  lead 
shot may be released. 

Handgun/Shotgun (“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 
1.  An officer’s decision to draw or exhibit a firearm should be based on the 
tactical  situation  at  hand  and  the  officer’s  reasonable  belief  there  is  a 
substantial risk that the situation will escalate to the point where deadly 
force  may  be  justified.  Unnecessarily  drawing  or  exhibiting  a  firearm 
may  limit  an  officer’s  alternatives  in  controlling  a  situation,  create 
unnecessary  anxiety  on  the  part  of  citizens,  and  result  in  an 
unwarranted or accidental discharge of the firearm.  

2.  Officers  should  shoot  at  the  “center  mass”  for  maximum  stopping 

effectiveness and minimal danger to innocent bystanders.  

3.  Flashlights  mounted  to  firearms  will  be  used  only  for  the  purposes 
authorized and intended and will not be used routinely in the place of 
a hand-held flashlight. 

 

Rifle 
1. 

It is the supervisor’s responsibility to ensure proper deployment of rifles 
and address over-deployment. 

2.  Area supervisor will: 

a.  Proceed  immediately  to  the  incident  involving  the  rifle  deployment 

and assume tactical control, when possible;   

b.  Ensure that rifle deployment is appropriate for the incident;  
c. 

If rifle deployment is inappropriate for the incident, modify or cancel 
deployment. 

Additional Considerations: 

Summon medical attention on all use of a firearm (Low Lethality/“00” Buck & 
Slug) and/or Rifle, and/or any incident where a subject is injured and/or 
complains of injury. 
 
Notify communications of “Shots Fired!” not applicable for Low Lethality  
 
Notify a supervisor when a firearm (Low Lethality/“00” Buck & Slug) and/or 
Rifle have been used. 
 
Any intentional use of a firearm (Low Lethality/“00” Buck & Slug) and/or Rifle 
on a subject is a reportable Use of Force Report in Blue Team.    
   

1183 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Inform detention personnel a Low Lethality Shotgun has been used on the 
subject and ensure they have been screened by the detention facility medical 
staff. (When applicable) 
 
Rifle Deployment  
 
All rifle deployments are a reportable Use of Force Report in Blue Team. 
Exceptions to Blue Team reporting are, rifle deployments as part of training or 
a tactical drill exercise (i.e., MACTAC tests), SWAT personnel and Corrections 
officers conducting a high risk transport. 
 
When multiple officers deploy rifles during a single incident, the supervisor 
should designate one deploying officer to complete the Rifle Deployment Report 
in Blue Team, listing all officers that deployed a rifle as “involved officers” in 
the report. (5/14, 9/14) 
 

6/002.03    REPORTABLE USE OF FORCE  
 

I.
II.

REPORTABLE FORCE INCIDENTS 
INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTING 

I.

REPORTABLE FORCE INCIDENTS 

 
Reportable force incidents which require the completion of a Use of Force Report in 
Blue Team include, but are not limited to:  

1.  Empty Hand Tactics (Takedown with injury, Strikes, Kicks) 
2.  Baton/Impact Weapons (Jabs, Strikes) 
3.  OC Spray 
4.  ECD (To include spark display) 
5.  LVNR® (Level 1, 2 and 3) 
6.  Canine (With bites)  
7.  Use of Force with a vehicle: 

a.  Blocking (With officer initiated contact) 
b.  Stationary  Vehicle  Immobilization  Technique  (Pinching  -  With  contact 

between vehicles) 

c.  P.I.T. (Used or attempted) 
d.  Ramming 

8.  Use of Force with a Firearm 
a.  Low Lethality Shotgun 
b.  Handgun/Shotgun(“00” Buck & Slug)/Rifle 

Deployment of Rifles (Excluding SWAT/SERT)   

 

1184 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Note:  In  addition  to  the  Use  of  Force  Report  other  Blue  Team  reports  may  be 
required depending on the force application. (Firearm Discharge, Rifle Deployment and 
Vehicle Pursuit) 
 
Supervisors  will  respond  without  necessary  delay  to  all  potential  reportable  uses  of 
force.   
 

II.

INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTING 

 
A.  The department reviews or investigates all reportable use of force incidents to 
determine  their  justification,  as  well  as  to  correct  any  identifiable  training 
deficiencies.  Officers  involved  in  reportable  use  of  force  incidents  will 
immediately notify their supervisor or, if unavailable, another on-duty supervisor, 
and  complete  the  Use  of  Force  Report  in  Blue  Team  prior  to  the  end  of 
shift (exceptions must be approved by supervisor). The report should distinguish 
which  force  option  was  selected  and  why  it  was  objectively  reasonable.  
Supervisors  will  respond  to  each  use  of  force  incident  in  which  reportable 
force  is  used,  conduct  an  investigation  and  assist  with  the  completion  of  the 
use of force report. (NOTE: Acting supervisors are not authorized to complete 
this  investigation).  The  report  will  be  required  by  each  officer  involved  in  a 
use of force incident when reportable force is used. All Use of Force Reports 
in  Blue  Team  will  be  completely  coordinated  through  the  officer’s  chain  of 
command  and  entered  into  IA  Pro  within  30  calendar  days  of  the  event.  
Internal  Affairs  will  provide  a  monthly  report  to  the  appropriate  Deputy  Chief 
listing all Use of Force Reports which have exceeded the 30-day limitation. 
 

B.  A  Use  of  Force  Report  is  not  required  when  no  injury  and/or  complaint  of 

injury occurs as a result of: 
1. 

Lock/Standing Search; 

Low  Profile  Pat  Down/High  Profile  Pat  Down/Arm 

Routine Handcuffing; 
Felony Prone Handcuffing (Front and Rear); 
Felony Prone Search Felony Kneeling; 
Baton Escort Technique; 
Takedown; 
Blocking without contact. 

C.  The  following  Use  of  Force  Options  requires  a  Use  of  Force  Report  be 

completed by the involved officer.  
1. 

Any  use  of  force  which  is  required  to  overcome  subject 
resistance  to  gain  compliance  that  results  in  death,  injury  or 
complaint of injury, complaint of continuing pain; 

Any  takedown  which  causes  injury  or  verbal  complaint  of 

 

injury; 

 

1185 

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 

2. 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

Use of OC Spray; 
Lateral Vascular Neck Restraint; 
Use of an ECD or a Spark Demonstration; 
Baton Takedowns, Strikes and Jabs; 
Empty Hand Strikes, Punches, and Kicks; 
Use of a Low Lethality Shotgun (five yards or greater); 
A  citizen  or  person  arrested  complains  that  an  injury  has 

been inflicted as the result of the use of force; or 

PIT (used, attempted, or declared). 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

 

D.  CIRT will complete the use of force report when deadly force is used (i.e. 

PIT over 40 MPH, or Low Lethality Shotgun less than five yards. 
 

E.  The following incidents require a Firearm Discharge Report.  

1.  Accidental  Discharge  of  a  firearm  during  a  law  enforcement 

operation. 

2.  A firearm is discharged resulting in death or serious bodily injury; 
3.  A Non-Injury or Property Damage Intentional Discharge of a Firearm 
Incident  (which  includes  an  intentional  discharge  at  anything  other 
than a person, such as a dog) 

4.  When  shots  are  fired  outside  the  firearm’s  range,  excluding  off-duty 
situations  such  as  hunting  or  participating  in  competitive  shooting. 
When  a  firearm  is  discharged  at  a  human  being  and/or  an  animal 
in  self-defense  or  to  humanely  euthanize  an  animal  (excluding 
resident areas), CIRT will complete the Firearm Discharge Report. 
5.  When  a  resident  area  officer  discharges  a  firearm  at  an  animal 
either  in  self-defense  or  to  humanely  euthanize  the  animal,  the 
resident  officer  will  complete  the  Firearm  Discharge  Report.  (1/14, 
9/14)■ 

 
6/002.04  POST USE OF FORCE PROCEDURES 

The  department  reviews  and/or  investigates  all  reportable  use  of  force  incidents  to 
determine  their  justification,  as  well  as  to  correct  any  identifiable  training  deficiencies. 
Officers  involved  in  reportable  use  of  force  or  alleged  use  of  force  incidents  will 
immediately  notify  their  supervisor.  If  unavailable,  the  officer  will  notify  another  on-duty 
supervisor,  and  complete  the  Use  of  Force  Report  in  Blue  Team  prior  to  the  end  of 
shift. Supervisor will complete a Citizen Contact for unfounded alleged use of force. Any 
exceptions  to  this  must  be  approved  by  the  supervisor.  The  report  should  include  a 
detailed  description  on  the  level  of  force,  tool  and/or  tactic  used,  to  include  its 
effectiveness or ineffectiveness. Each application of a reportable Use of Force Tool/Tactic 
must be separately justified and documented.  
 
III.

REPORTABLE FORCE INCIDENTS 

 

1186 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 
Reportable force incidents which require the completion of a Use of Force Report 
in Blue Team include, but are not limited to:  

9.  Empty Hand Tactics (Takedown with injury, Strikes, Kicks) 
10. Baton/Impact Weapons (Jabs, Strikes) 
11. OC Spray 
12. ECD  
13. LVNR® (Level 1, 2 and 3) 
14. K-9 (With bites)  
15. Use of Force with a vehicle: 

 

 

a.  Blocking (With intentional contact) 
b.  Stationary  Vehicle  Immobilization  Technique  (Pinching  -  With  contact 

between vehicles) 

c.  P.I.T. (Used or attempted at speeds 40 MPH or below) 

16. Low Lethality Shotgun-Discharge (5 yards or greater) 

A  Use  of  Force  report  is  required  by  each  officer  involved  in  a  use  of  force 
incident.  Any  civilian  employee  who  uses  force  (empty  hand,  OC  Spray  and/or 
Firearm)  is  required  to  complete  a  Use  of  Force  Report  in  Blue  Team.   
Additional Blue Team reports may be required depending on the force application. 
(Firearm Discharge, Rifle Deployment (excluding SWAT/SERT) and Vehicle Pursuit) 
Note:  In  incidents  where  deadly  force  is  used,  CIRT  will  complete  the 
appropriate reports.  

A Firearm Discharge Report is required: 

1.  When shots are fired outside the firearm’s range, excluding off-duty 

situations such as hunting or participating in competitive shooting. When a 
firearm is discharged at a human being and/or an animal in self-defense 
or to humanely euthanize an animal (excluding resident areas), CIRT will 
complete the Firearm Discharge Report.  

2.  When a resident area officer discharges a firearm at an animal either in 
self-defense or to humanely euthanize the animal, the resident officer will 
complete the Firearm Discharge Report.  

A Use of Force Report is not required when no injury and/or complaint of injury 
occurs as a result of: 

Low  Profile  Pat  Down/High  Profile  Pat  Down/Arm 

Lock/Standing Search; 

Routine Handcuffing; 
Felony Prone Handcuffing (Front and Rear); 
Felony Prone Search Felony Kneeling; 
Baton Escort Technique; 
Takedown. 

1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 

 

 

1187 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

IV.

USE OF FORCE INVESTIGATION 

 

III. 

 

 
Supervisors  will  respond,  without  delay,  to  each  use  of  force  or  alleged  use  of 
force  incident  in  which  reportable  force  is  used,  conduct  an  investigation  and 
assist with the completion of the use of force report to include any Use of Force 
Report  by  a  civilian  employee.  (NOTE:  Acting  supervisors  are  not  authorized  to 
complete Use of Force investigations). 
 
INVESTIGATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES: Use of Non-Deadly Force  

A.  Non-Deadly  Force  requiring  a  Use  of  Force  report  but  not  resulting  in  death 
or serious bodily injury will be investigated by the officer’s chain of command.  
 
Note: Acting supervisors are not authorized to complete this investigation. 
 

B.  All  reportable  Uses  of  Force  on  a  subject  regardless  of visible  injury  will  be 
photographed  and  downloaded  into  Blue  Team.    If  CSI  responds  and 
documents  the  injuries,  or  if  for  some  reason  the  photos  cannot  be 
downloaded into Blue Team, articulate this in the report, to indicate where the 
photos can be located.  

 

1. 

The Officer will: 

a.  Request  that  Communications  notify  the  respective  immediate 

supervisor when a reportable non-deadly use of force occurs; 

b.  Complete  the  Use  of  Force  Report  in  Blue  Team  and  any  other 

required reports connected to the incident; 

c.  Forwards  the  Use  of  Force  Report  and  any  other  required  reports 
to  the  investigating  supervisor  via  Blue  Team,  sending  a  copy  to 
their immediate supervisor. 

 
Additional Tool/Tactic Requirements: 
 

ECD 

(cid:120)  Handle the probes in the same manner as contaminated needles 
and  sharps  in  accordance  with  department  bio-hazard  disposal 
procedures  (see  5/110.10),  and  impound  all  probes,  wires  and 
cartridges  as  evidence.  In  cases  of  deadly  force  or  in-custody 
death CSI will impound the probes and fired cartridges; 

(cid:120)  Provide the ECD to a supervisor for data and/or video download 

prior to the end of shift.  

Canine 

(cid:120) 

Injuries caused by the police service dog to persons who were 
not  the  subject  of  the  search  will  be  documented  in  an 
Officer’s Report, and will require a supervisor response. 

 

1188 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

2.  A supervisor will: 

 

1.  Ensure medical assistance has been requested when applicable; 
2.  Respond  to  the  scene  without  unnecessary  delay,  if  unable  to 
respond, request an alternate supervisor at the same level or higher 
respond to the scene; 

3.  Document  investigation  in  a  Citizen  Contact  (CC)  in  Blue  Team 

when alleged use of force is determined to be unfounded;  
4.  Ensure the level of force used is a use of non-deadly force; 
5.  Notify  Communications  and  the  area  lieutenant  or  watch  commander 

6. 

to ensure proper notifications are made;  
Interview the subject, officer(s), medical personnel and witnesses who 
claim  to  have  firsthand  knowledge  of  the  incident.  Witness 
statements should be documented on a voluntary statement.  

7.  Ensure  photographs  are  taken  of  the  subject(s),  the  scene  and 
officer(s)  involved  and  collect  any  evidence  related  to  the  Use  of 
Force; 

8.  Check the surrounding area for any video surveillance; 
9.  Viewing of Third Party Video Prior to Giving Statements: 

An  officer  shall  be  given  the  opportunity  to  review  third  party 
surveillance video when the video depicts the officer’s actions during a 
reportable  use  of  force  incident.    For the  purpose  of  this  policy,  third 
party surveillance video is considered video recorded and made available 
by  third  party  security  systems,  video  captured  from  cells  phones, 
tablets,  etc.,  and/or  video  recorded  by  handheld  cameras  at  CCDC, 
which we are in legal possession of and are able to legally view. 
1.  The immediate supervisor (or investigating supervisor) will: 

a.  Permit  the  officer  to  review  only  their  own  actions  as  depicted 
by  the  third  party  surveillance  video.    If  multiple  officers  are 
shown  on  the  third  party  surveillance  video  using  force,  it’s 
necessary  that  each  officer  view  only  their  own  actions  -    not 
the actions of the other officers - before doing his Use of Force 
report; 

b.  Ensure  the  third  party  video  is  impounded  as  evidence  and 

noted in BlueTeam. 

10. Review all applicable reports in Blue Team to ensure accuracy and 

completeness.  
a.  Document  how  a  use  of  force  has  been  determined  to  be 

justified and in adherence to procedure,  

b.  Document  any  training  deficiencies  identified  and  how  they  were 

c.  Document if misconduct is identified and that an SOC has been 

corrected, 

filed.   

11. When an ECD has been used: 

1189 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

a.  Ensure  the  data  record  of  the  ECD  and/or  the  video  in  which  a 
reportable use of force incident occurs has been uploaded into Blue 
Team  prior  to  the  end  of  shift.  (X26  uploads  must be  attached  in 
either a .pdf or .rtf format);  

b.  Verify  the  probes,  wires  and  cartridges  are  properly  impounded  and 
arrange  for  replacement  cartridges.  Accidental  discharges  will  not 
require impounding of the probes, wires and cartridges unless there 
has been an injury. 
1)  Forward to the next supervisor in the involved officers’ chain.  

Use of Force with a Vehicle 

 

 

 

PIT-Traffic officers will respond to assist with the traffic investigation.  
 
Note:  Request  CSI response to take photographs of the subject(s), the 
scene  and  officer(s)  involved  and  collect  any  evidence  related  to  the 
Use of Force; 
 
Blocking- Blocking with contact of an unoccupied vehicle or a subject’s 
vehicle unintentionally touches the patrol vehicle; the contact will be 
reported as a traffic incident, LVMPD 42, Vehicle Incident Report. 

Pinching- Stationary Vehicle Immobilization Technique (Pinching) is a 
reportable Use of Force Report in Blue Team. In addition the contact 
between the vehicles will be reported as a traffic incident, LVMPD 42, 
Vehicle Incident Report. In the event of third-party property damage, the 
responding traffic officer will complete the LVMPD 42, Vehicle Incident 
Report.   
 
Note:  Blocking,  Pinching  and  PIT  are  planned  enforcement  techniques;  an 
accident  report  will  not  be  required.  In  the  event  of  third-party  property 
damage, the responding traffic officer will complete the LVMPD 42, Vehicle 
Incident Report.   
 
1. 

The Area Lieutenant/Watch Commander will: 

a.  Respond  to  the  scene  when  significant  force  is  used.  If  unable 
to  respond,  request  an  alternate  supervisor  at  the  same  level 
respond to the scene; 

b.  Ensure interviews, photographs and reports are being completed; 
c.  Notify  Internal  Affairs  Section  Lieutenant  if  significant  force  is 

used; 

d.  Review  the  Use  of  Force  Report  in  Blue  Team  to  ensure 
accuracy  and  completeness,  then  forward  to  the  Bureau 
Commander.  

 

1190 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

2. 

The Bureau/Area Commander will: 

a.  Complete  the  Use  of  Force  administrative  review  in  Blue  Team 

 

 

and forward to IAB. 
 

IV. 

 

INVESTIGATIVE  RESPONSIBILITIES:  Use  of  Deadly  Force  or  Force  Involving  Serious 
Bodily Injury  
 
It  is  the  policy  of  this  department  to  conduct  a  fair,  impartial  and  thorough 
investigation  of  all  uses  of  deadly  force  for  the  interest  of  the  officer,  the 
department  and  the  community  alike.  The  following  procedures  shall  apply  to  all 
deadly force investigations: 

A. 

Primary Responsibilities in a Deadly Force Investigation 

1.  Violent  Crimes  section:  When  available,  detectives  from  the  Violent  Crimes 
section  will  respond  immediately  to  the  scene,  contact  the  Incident 
Commander for direction and provide assistance. 

2.  Force Investigation Team (FIT):  

a.  FIT Response Criteria: 

1)  Any  use  of  deadly  force  as  described  in  LVMPD  –  Use  of  Force 

policy 6/002.0; 

2)  Officer Involved Shootings (fatal or non-fatal); 
3)  PIT over 40 MHP; 
4)  Ramming; 
5)  Low Lethal Shotgun fired at under 5 yards 
6) 
7) 
8)  Other Jurisdiction requests meeting FIT criteria. 

In-custody death involving Patrol or Corrections officer(s); 
In-custody death of an inmate housed at CCDC or medical facility; 

b.  The  criminal  investigation  will  seek  to  determine  whether  the  use  of 
deadly  force  was  legally  justified  under  criminal  law.  FIT  also  directs 
the  investigation  against  a  suspect  who  either  committed  crimes  which 
led  to  the  use  of  deadly  force  or  who  has  committed  crimes  against 
an officer. The ranking FIT personnel at the scene shall be in overall 
charge  of  police  activities  which  occur  at  the  crime  scene.  FIT 
detectives  shall  arrest  the  suspect  on  applicable  charges.    If  the 
involved officer declines to provide FIT with a voluntary statement, and 
they  are  the  only  witness  to  the  incident,  the  officer  will  decide 
whether to arrest the suspect.  If the involved officer decides to make 
an arrest, the officer will be responsible for completing the TCR/DOA in 
the  field.  The  supervisor  will  arrange  for  transporting  the  suspect. 
Additionally,  the  involved  officer  will  dictate  an  arrest  report  before  the 
end of the officer’s shift. 

3.  Critical Incident Review Team (CIRT):  Conducts non-criminal, administrative 
examinations of uses of deadly force or other high-risk police operations as 

 

1191 

B. 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

directed by the Sheriff. The purpose of this review is to improve individual 
and  agency  performance  through  the  evaluation  of  decision  making,  tactics 
used,  supervision  and  the  actual  use  of  force.  CIRT  will  then  present 
conclusions to  the  Sheriff  that  may  identify  possible  training  needs  (for  the 
individual,  squad, unit, section  or  department)  and/or  changes  to  policies 
and practices.  

4.  Crime Scene Investigations Section (CSI):  CSI responds to a deadly force 
incident to complete crime scene documentation.  The ranking Crime Scene 
Investigations  member  shall  be  in  charge  of  the  collection,  marking, 
recording,  and  processing  of  evidentiary  material  at  the  crime  scene.  Prior 
to  commencing  the  crime  scene  investigation,  the  FIT  Supervisor  and 
ranking  CSI  Supervisor  shall  confer  to  determine  the  actions  to  be  taken 
by  those  persons  assigned  to  the  scene,  including  which  officers, 
detectives, and crime scene analysts shall be authorized to enter the crime 
scene perimeter. 
 
Involved/Witness Officer(s) 

1.  When an officer intentionally discharges a firearm at a human being, uses 
deadly  force,  has  an  unintentional  discharge  of  a  firearm  during  a  police 
operation,  causes serious  bodily  injury  or  becomes  aware  of  an  in-custody 
death, the officer will: 
a.  Ensure life safety of others; 
b.  Ensure the scene is safe and secure; 
c.  Notify  both  Communications  (via  radio  if  on-duty)  and  a  supervisor 

without delay;  
1)  If needed, will request medical assistance and provide information on 

injuries; 

2)  Include suspect description and location. 

2. 

In addition, off-duty officers or plain-clothes personnel will:  
a.  Be  aware  of  the  particular  danger  of  a  potential  police-on-police 

confrontation when first-responding officers arrive to the scene; 

b.  Make certain they are readily identifiable as officers; Off-duty officers or 
plain-clothes  personnel  should  display  their  badges  and/or  identification 
prominently and identify themselves frequently;  
Inform  Communications  via  radio  (or  if  off-duty  and  no  radio  available, 
they  should  call  9-1-1)  if  they  have  taken  action,  are  armed  or  are 
wearing plainclothes; 

c. 

d.  When  confronted  by  first-responding  officers,  off-duty  officers  or  plain-

clothes personnel should be aware of and obey first-responding officers’ 
verbal commands. 

3. 

In  deadly  force  investigations, FIT  detectives  shall  be  briefed,  by  the  first-
responding supervisor or supervisor in charge of the event, on the names 
and locations of the Involved Officer and potential Witness Officers. 

 

1192 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

a.  When there is concern that an officer is not a Witness Officer, but an 
Involved  Officer,  the  ranking  FIT  supervisor  will  make  the  final 
determination regarding the status of the officers(s).  

 

4.  Officer statements: 

a. 

Involved  Officer:    An  officer  or supervisor, who participated  in, 
directed or influenced the application of the use of force.  
1) 

Involved  Officers  may  provide  a  recorded  statement  to  FIT 
investigators.    If  given,  involved  officer  statements  should  be  taken 
at least 48 hours after the incident by FIT investigators. Note: The 
48 hours may be waived by the involved Officer.   

b.  Witness  Officer:  An  officer  or  supervisor  who  did  not participate  in  or 

directly influence the application of the use of force. 
1) 

W

itness  Officers  shall  provide  a  recorded  statement  to  FIT 
investigators.   An  officer  who  refuses  to  provide  such  information 
shall  be  deemed  to  be  in  violation  of  section  4/104.04  Obedience 
and  Insubordination  and  4/104.14  Duty  to  Provide  Statements. 
Witness  Officer  statements  will  be  taken  at  a  date,  time  and 
location determined by FIT investigators. 

C. 

Incident Responsibilities 

 

1.  Any officer or supervisor assigned, involved, or arrived on the scene of a 
use  of  force  investigation shall  not  leave  until  released  by  the supervisor 
in charge of the event.  

2.  The  supervisor  first  on  scene  will  act  as  Incident  Commander  (per 
5/213.06) until relieved by an area lieutenant or watch commander and will: 
a.  Ensure medical attention is provided for those in need; 
b.  Coordinate the search for outstanding suspects; 
c.  Ensure the immediate crime scene is secured and protected; 
d.  Oversee the identification and isolation of witnesses; 
e.  Ensure  witness  officer(s)  and  involved  officer(s)  are  separated  and 

placed in a secure and safe environment, with a witness monitor. 

f.  Contact  Communications  and  advise  the  type  of  incident  and  request 

that notifications be made; 

g.  When  practical,  only  the  involved  officer  and  a  supervisor  should  be 
present  during  the  Public  Safety  Statement  (PSS).   If  multiple  officers 
are  involved,  the  PSS  should  be  done  separately  with  each  involved 
officer,  by  the  same  supervisor.   The  questions  below  will  be  read 
directly from the PSS card to the officer. A supervisor will write down 
the officer’s response. The PSS will be documented and maintained by 
the  supervisor  until  provided  to  a  FIT  detective.  No  unauthorized  card 
or form will be used for the PSS documentation.  
1)  Did you discharge your firearm? 

 

1193 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

If so, in what direction? 

a) 
b)  Approximately where were you located when you fired? 
c)  How many shots do you think you fired? 
Is anyone injured? 
a) 

If so, where are they located? 

2) 

3)  Are there any outstanding suspects? 
If so, what is their description? 

a) 
b)  What direction and mode of travel?   
c)  How long have they been gone?   
d)  What crime(s) have they committed?   
e)  What type of weapon do they have? 
Is it possible the suspect fired rounds at you?   
a) 
b)  How many shots do you think the suspect fired? 
c)  Approximately where was the suspect located when they fired? 

If so, what direction were the rounds fired from?  

4) 

5)  Do you know if any other officer(s) discharged their firearms? 

If so, who are they? 

a) 
b)  Approximately where was the officers(s) located when they fired? 
6)  Are  there  any  weapons  or  evidence  that  needs  to  be 

secured/protected? 
a) 

If so, where are they located? 
7)  Are you aware of any witnesses?  

a) 

If so, what is their location? 

 
Note:  The  PSS  is  a  series  of  questions  to  obtain  information  to 
determine  an  immediate  threat  to  public  safety.  The  PSS  must  be 
taken  in  a  timely  manner  and  under  a  condition  which  has 
demonstrated an immediate threat to the public. (An example would be 
shots fired by an officer or a subject in the direction where the public 
may  be  in  immediate  danger.)    The  supervisor  must  take  appropriate 
action based on the information received from the PSS.  
 

3.  The Watch Commander (and/or an area lieutenant) will:  

a.  Respond immediately to the scene of the use of deadly force. 

4.  The Incident Commander will: 

a.  Designate a Command Post; 
b.  Establish  the  outer  perimeter,  the  staging  area,  and  the  media  staging 

area; 
Identify and separate civilian witnesses; 
Identify and separate officer witnesses; 

c. 
d. 
e.  Assign  an  Officer  Witness  Monitor(s)  and  explain  their  duties  to  them, 

which are: 
1)  To ensure that involved officers and witness officers do not discuss 

the incident being investigated. 

1194 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

2) 

3) 

The  monitor  shall  allow  the  officer’s  attorney  and 

association representative to communicate privately with the officer. 

The monitor will not talk to the officer about the facts 

and circumstances of the incident. 

5. 

Remain  with  the  officer  until  firearms  countdown  is 

completed. 
a.  Violent Crimes detail or on-scene Supervisor will:  
b.  Respond immediately to begin a preliminary investigation; 
c.  Ensure  the  Major  Incident  Log  has  been  assigned  and  is  being 

completed.  

d.  Assist  in  the  early  management  of  the  crime  scene,  the  identification 

and separation of witnesses, and the canvass. 

6.  Communications will: 

a.  Assign at least one additional sergeant to the scene; 

1)  If  sergeants  are  unavailable  for  the  particular  area  command  in 
which  the  use  of  deadly  force  occurred,  the  dispatcher  will 
assign  sergeants  from  other  area  commands  or  units  other  than 
Patrol. 

b.  Ensure the proper notifications are made immediately by utilizing the 

Critical Incident/OIS Alert ID notification. 

The  following  guidelines  for  notifications  are  to  be  made  by  Communications 
dependent upon the type of incident: 
1.  Use of Deadly Force or Force Involving Serious Bodily Injury      

a.  The officer’s immediate supervision (sergeant, lieutenant, and captain);  
b.  The watch commander (and area lieutenant); 
c.   Violent Crimes Section; 
d.  FIT; 
e.  OIO Bureau Commander; 
f.  CIRT; 
g.  Crime Scene Investigations Section; 
h.  Risk Management Section; 
i.  PEAP; 
j.  Respective collective bargaining unit. 

 

2. 

Unintentional Discharge or Accidental Discharge of a Firearm at anything 

other than a person, or animal shoots:  
a.  The officer’s immediate supervision (sergeant, lieutenant, and captain);  
b.  The watch commander (and area lieutenant); 
c.  The officer’s bureau commander; 
d.  Crime Scene Investigations Section; 
e.  CIRT; 

1)  CIRT  will  investigate  any  unintentional  discharge  of  a  firearm  that 
occurs  during  a  police  operation,  such  as  the  inadvertent  discharge 

1195 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

of  a  shotgun  while  deploying  it  in  response  to  a  high-risk  call, 
and/or when officer discharges firearm at an animal. 

f.   Internal Affairs; 

1) 

IA  will  investigate  any  accidental  discharges  that  occur  not  as  the 
result of a police operation, such as an unintentional discharge of a 
shotgun while inspecting it at an area command parking lot. 

g.  Risk Management Section, when injury or property damage result; 
h.  PEAP; 
i.  Respective collective bargaining unit. 

3.  Use  of  Force  with  a  vehicle  incident  that  causes  death  or  serious  bodily 

injury: (PIT over 40 MPH and Ramming) 
a.  The officer’s immediate supervision (sergeant, lieutenant, and captain);   
b.  The watch commander (and area lieutenant); 
c.  CIRT; 
d.  FIT; 
e.  OIO Bureau Commander 
f.  Traffic Bureau/Fatal Detail 
g.  Risk Management Section; 
h.  Crime Scene Investigations Section; 
i.  PEAP; 
j.  Respective collective bargaining unit. 

4.  The Use of PIT at speeds below 40mph when contact is made: 

a.  The officer’s immediate supervision (sergeant, lieutenant, and captain);    
b.  The watch commander (and area lieutenant); 
c.  An on-duty Traffic supervisor; 

1)  If  any  questions  or  concerns  arise  from  this  PIT  investigation, 
regarding  the  Use  of  Force  was  Deadly  or  Non-Deadly,  FIT 
and/or the Traffic Section/Fatal Detail shall be notified. 

 
D. 

Initial Briefing 

1.  The Incident Commander will: 

a.  Designate a location for the initial briefing as to provide a secure place 
where  operational  security  measures  can  be  met.  The  briefing  location 
will  not  compromise  the  integrity  of  the  immediate  crime  scene. 
Environmental factors and location of the media should be considered; 

2.  Violent Crimes or on-scene supervisor will: 

a.  Conduct the initial briefing;  
b.  Only essential personnel will attend the briefing. Essential personnel are 

identified as: 
1)  The supervisor(s) who obtained the Public Safety Statement; 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 

Involved officer’s supervision (sergeant, lieutenant, and captain); 
FIT personnel; 
Office of Internal Oversight Bureau Commander 
CSI personnel; 

 

1196 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

CIRT personnel; 
Traffic Bureau/Fatal Detail. (When Applicable) 
PIO 

6) 
7) 
8) 
All other personnel are deemed non-essential and will be excluded from 
the  briefing.  FIT  Section  Lieutenant  or  designee  will  monitor  those  in 
attendance for compliance.  

c.  A sign in sheet will be completed by all personnel at the briefing. The 

initial briefing should include the following: 
1)  Location  of  involved  officer(s),  witness  officer(s)  and/or  civilian 

witness(es); 

2)  Location of the subject(s); 
3)  Location of the scene(s); 
4)  Location of evidence; 
5)  Location of the Supervisor who took a PSS(when applicable) and ; 
6)  Details of the incident. 

d.  At  the  close  of  the  brief,  FIT  will  assumes  control  of  the  scene  and 

investigation.  

2.  The Office of Internal Oversight Bureau Commander or their designee will: 

a.  Coordinate  with  the  Office  of  Public  Information  prior  to  any  media 

release. 

 
 E.   Scene Walkthrough  

1.  The  purpose  of  the  scene  walkthrough with  an  officer  involved  is  to  help 
investigators  develop  an  understanding  of  the  scene  and  identify  potential 
physical evidence. The walkthrough is voluntary and it is not an interview. 
Detailed narratives shall be avoided. If more than one officer is involved in 
the  incident,  their  walkthroughs  will  be  conducted  independently  of  each 
other.  Walkthroughs  will  be  conducted  by  FIT  personnel.  The  personnel 
observing the walkthrough shall be limited to:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

The officer involved; 
A representative of the officer or legal counsel; 
FIT detectives; 
FIT sergeant and/or lieutenant; 
CSI Director and/or supervisor. 

2.  Witness  officers  shall  provide  a  walkthrough  and  audio  recorded  statement 
as needed and directed by FIT.  An officer who refuses to provide such 
information  shall  be  deemed  to  be  in  violation  of  section  4/104.04 
Obedience  and  Insubordination  and  4/104.14  Duty  to  Provide  Statements. 
The personnel observing the walkthrough shall be limited to:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

The witness officer; 
A representative of the officer or legal counsel; 
FIT detectives; 
FIT sergeant and/or lieutenant; 
CSI Director and/or supervisor. 

 

1197 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

3.  FIT  will  provide  a  briefing  and  scene  walkthrough  to  CIRT  after  their 
determination  that  the  scene  is  completely  identified,  documented,  and 
evidence has been secured. 

4. 

5. 

CSI  personnel  will  collect,  preserve,  and  book  physical  evidence  within 
the  identified  crime  scenes.  The  FIT  supervisor  is  responsible  for 
determining  the  steps  taken  in  the  handling  of  any  potential  video 
surveillance.  Such  video  surveillance  evidence  shall  be  seized  and  booked 
in  accordance  with  LVMPD  Search  and  Seizure  Policy,  Section  4 
(5/200.01). 

No photographs of the crime scene shall be taken independent  of the 
CSI  Section.    If  other  photographs,  audio  or  video  recordings  have  been 
taken, such evidence will be reported to the FIT by any officer who has 
such knowledge. 

 
F. 

Media Release 

1.  Media inquiries shall be referred to the Office of Internal Oversight Bureau 
Commander,  or  their  designee.  The  bureau  commander  will  provide  liaison 
with the on-scene and follow-up media inquiries. At the close of the scene 
investigation, the FIT lieutenant will prepare the written media release. The 
Office  of  Public  Information  will  also  be  an  available  resource  in  deadly-
force incidents. 

2.  The  identity  of  officers  involved  in  deadly  force  incidents  will  not  be 
released  to  the  public  or  media  for  48  hours.  The  Office  of  Public 
Information  will  collect  media  coverage  of  deadly  force  incidents  and  will 
provide  the  coverage  to  FIT  and  to  CIRT.  Such  coverage  may  be  a 
resource for both the investigative and administrative review. 

3.  FIT Lieutenant will be responsible to coordinate with the Sheriff/Undersheriff 
and  the  PIO  to  construct  a  formal  media  release  to  the  general  public 
after the 72 hour Executive Staff Brief. 
 
Countdown of Firearms and Photographs of Officer Involved 

G. 

1.  The FIT Supervisor will: 

firearms counted down; 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

Determine  which  officers  will  be  photographed  and  have  their 

Ensure  the  involved  and  witness  officer(s)  relinquish  custody  of 

their firearm(s) to the Crime Scene Investigations Section;  

Provide  a  replacement  if  the  firearm  used  was  a  handgun  for 

which there is a department-issued replacement available; 
1)  No immediate replacement will be provided for any department-issued 
or personally-owned long guns, such as an AR-15 rifle or shotgun.  
Ensure  the  officer’s  equipment  is  photographed  in  place  (on  the 
person)  prior  to  examination  to  show  the  location,  presence,  and 
condition  of  any  tools  (firearm,  ECD,  baton,  flashlight,  etc.)  available 
during the incident;   

 

1198 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

e.  Direct  the  countdown  of  an  officer’s  firearm.  It  is  preferable  the 
countdown  occurs  at  the  Force  Investigation  Team’s  office;  however, 
circumstances may dictate another location is utilized.  
1)  Prior to handling specialized weapons or an unfamiliar firearm, Crime 
Scene  Investigations  personnel  will  permit  an  officer  who  is  familiar 
with the firearm to unload the firearm, under supervision, to ensure 
a safe countdown.  

2.  CSI personnel will: 

a.  Ensure,  in  an  officer-involved  shooting,  that  the  officer’s  firearm(s)  are 
not modified, operated, loaded or unloaded in any fashion following the 
shooting prior to countdown.  

b.  Complete  the  documentation  of  the  officer’s  immediate  condition. 

Standard documentation will include, but is not limited to: 
(cid:120)  Photographs  of  at  least  four  full-length  views  of  the  officer  (front, 

(cid:120) 
(cid:120) 

(cid:120) 

back, right and left sides) in a standing position;  
Items of evidence or injuries to show general location and condition; 
Items  of  evidence  or  injuries  (with  and  without  scale)  so  they  can 
be recognized and identified;  
Items  or  areas  (patterned  injuries,  bloodstains,  bite  marks,  etc.) 
where it is necessary to document class and individual characteristics 
for future comparison, and at least one facial view. 
 

1.  The involved officers have the same rights and privileges, regarding criminal 

investigation interviews that all persons have. 

2.  When  practical,  involved  officers  should  be  interviewed  last  to  ensure 
investigators have as complete a picture as possible prior to the interview. 
3.  FIT  will  conduct  a  voluntary  interview,  a  minimum  of  48  hours  after  the 
incident (unless waived by the involved officer), with the officer whose use 
of  force  resulted  in  death.  Since  the  interviews  are  voluntary,  involved 
officers have the right to decline to be interviewed.  

5. 

4.  FIT will forward the investigative case file on all OIS’s to the DA’s office 
for  review  regardless  of  a  voluntary  statement  provided  by  an  involved 
officer.  
If an involved officer refuses to provide a voluntary statement or decides to 
wait  before  giving  one,  they  will  be  admonished  by  CIRT  not  to  discuss 
the incident with any other officers involved in the incident. In those cases 
where an involved officer declines to provide a timely interview, investigators 
shall  document  their  efforts  to  obtain  the  interview,  including  when  the 
request was made and to whom it was directed. A subsequent compelled 
interview,  conducted  by  CIRT,  will  be  scheduled  at  a  later  date  and  in 
compliance with the rights and obligations set out in NRS 289.  

6.  All  statements  provided  to  FIT  will  be  transcribed  and  available  to  the 

officer before providing a statement to CIRT.  

H. 

Force Investigation Team’s Interview Guidelines 

 

1199 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

 

I. 

Viewing of Third Party Video Prior to Giving Statements 

Although  our  intent  is  always  to  preserve  the  sanctity  of  life  for  all  citizens, 
there  may  come  a  time  when  an  officer  uses  deadly  force.    From  time-to-
time, these events are captured on third party surveillance video which can be 
used  to  further  the  post-use  of  deadly  force  investigation.    They  can  also 
serve as a memory aid to officers before they provide voluntary statements for 
the  criminal  investigation  to  the  Force  Investigation  Team  (FIT).      Therefore, 
on  a  case-by-case  basis,  the  FIT  Supervisor  may  give  the  involved  officer(s) 
(not  witness  officers)  the  option  to  view  their  actions  during  a  deadly  force 
incident  when  captured  on  third  party  surveillance  video.  (Reference  policy 
4/107.01 regarding Body Worn Cameras.) 

 

The following procedure outlines the process: 
1.  On a case-by-case basis, FIT Investigator(s) may: 

a.  Ask  the  involved  officer  if  he  are  willing  to  provide  a  voluntary 
statement  to  FIT  and  inform  him  that  third  party  surveillance  video 
exists depicting their actions; 
Inform the involved officer that he and his representative will be given 
an opportunity to review the third party surveillance video;  

b. 

c.  Provide  the  officer  and  his  representative  an  opportunity  to  review  that 

portion of the third party video that depicts the officer’s actions;  

d.  Schedule and conduct the interview; and, 
e.  Make  a  copy  of  the  third  party  video  surveillance  and  impound  it  as 

evidence. 

2.  The Force Investigation Team Investigator will not: 

Make  and  distribute  copies  of  the  third  party  video  surveillance  to 
the  involved  officer,  his  legal  counsel,  or  collective  bargaining 
association  representative  at  any  time  before  or  after  the  statement 
is taken.    
 

1.  The Involved Officer’s Immediate Supervisor will: 

a.  Complete  Notice  of  Relief  of  Duty  (LVMPD  117),  thus  placing  the 
involved  officer  in  relief  of  duty  status  for  any  incident  involving  the 
use of deadly force or wherein serious bodily injury results. Supervisors 
will  place  other  officers  in  relief  of  duty  status  at  the  direction  of 
PEAP. This will be done based   on all the facts and circumstances 
known  to  the  PEAP  personnel  and  only  for  the  well-being  of  that 
officer.  

2.  The CIRT Supervisor will:  

a.  Ensure  the  Firearms  Discharge  Report  and  CIRT  Case  in  IAPro  are 

Reporting Procedures 

completed for uses of deadly force.  

1200 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

b.  Ensure  the  following  forms  are  completed  and  provided  to  the  FIT  to 
be memorialized in the case file of a use of deadly force incident: 
1)  Major Incident Log; 

3.  The Officer of Internal Oversight Bureau Commander, or designee, will brief 
the  Sheriff,  Undersheriff  and/or  Assistant  Sheriffs  upon  completion  of  the 
initial briefing with the details of the incident.  

4.  Upon  completion  of  the  preliminary  investigation  the  FIT  Lieutenant  or 
designee  will  draft  an  email  detailing  the  sequence  of  events  and 
information learned. The email will be sent to the following:  
a.  Sheriff 
b.  Undersheriff 
c.  Assistant Sheriff(s) 
d.  Office of General Counsel 
e.  Deputy Chief of Involved Officer 
f.  Patrol Area Captain and/or Involved Officer Bureau Commander  
g.  OIO Bureau Commander  
h.  Director of PIO 
i.  CIRT Lieutenant  
j.  OOTS Lieutenant  
k.  OIO sergeant  
l.  CIRT Sergeant 
m.  CIRT Team executive support 
n.   FIT LEST 

J.

Police Employee Assistance Program (PEAP) Involvement 

1.  PEAP  personnel  respond  to  use  of  force  incidents  resulting  in  death, 
serious  injury,  or  where  death  could  have  resulted  or  any  intentional 
discharge of a firearm at a human being. PEAP arranges for psychological 
counseling  of  involved  officers  by  a  qualified  psychologist  and  advises  the 
appropriate chain of command of the officer’s readiness to return to duty. 
2.  Upon  PEAP  personnel’s  arrival  to  the  scene  they  will  contact  the  FIT 
supervisor.  After  conferring  with  the  FIT  supervisor,  PEAP  will  provide 
assistance to the officers involved in the incident. 

3.  PEAP  personnel  will  not  become  involved  in  the  investigative  process,  nor 
will  personnel  discuss  any  details  of  the  incident  with  the  involved  officer 
prior to the officer providing a statement to FIT or CIRT.  PEAP personnel 
will  be  able  to  interact  with  involved  officers  and  can  explain  the 
investigative  process  to  them  while the  officer  is  under  the  observation  of 
the Officer Witness Monitor. 
If  PEAP  personnel  believe  a  Critical  Incident  Stress  Debriefing  is 
appropriate after a deadly force incident, PEAP will seek prior approval of 
such a forum with the FIT lieutenant and the CIRT lieutenant. 

4. 

1201 

 

 

 

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department 
Partners with the Community 

 

K.

1. 

Contact with Suspect or Person to Whom Force Was Applied 
If  a  suspect  or  person  to  whom  force  was  applied  is  transported  for 
emergency medical treatment, an officer shall accompany the subject to the 
hospital.  This  will  guarantee  the  chain  of  evidence  is  preserved  and 
memorialized  and  spontaneous  statements  can  be  documented.  The 
escorting  officer  will  verify  that  medical  personnel  are  aware  the  subject’s 
clothing and personal effects must be secured as evidence. 
Interviews with a suspect or person involved in a use of deadly force will 
be  video  or  audio  recorded.  If  a  suspect  has  been  transported  to  a 
hospital,  a  FIT  detective  will  arrange  for  a  timely  interview  when  it 
becomes  permissible.  Additional  evidence  from  the  suspect,  such  as  blood 
or ballistic evidence will be collected at the hospital. 
In circumstances such as an unintentional discharge or an inappropriate use 
of  deadly  force,  if  no  reasonable  suspicion  or  probable  cause  exists  to 
warrant an investigative detention, the subject is free to leave. Timely and 
consensual  efforts  will  be  made  to  attempt  to  identify  the  subject  and 
investigators  will  seek  the  subject’s  cooperation.  Subjects  will  be  told  their 
cooperation is voluntary and such interaction will then be documented. 
 
Executive Staff 72 Hour Briefing  

1.  FIT will provide a briefing to Executive Staff on the details of the criminal 

investigation related to the use of deadly force.  

2.  The  date,  time  and  location  of  the  briefing  will  be  determined  by  the 

Office of the Sheriff. 

L.

M.

The Administrative and Tactical Review 

1.  CIRT will brief the Organizational Development Bureau on preliminary review 

of tactical, training, and administrative issues. 

2.  During the criminal investigation conducted by FIT, they will provide copies 
of reports to CIRT as they become available. The criminal investigation can 
and  will  share  its  information  freely  with  the  administrative/tactical 
examination,  but  CIRT  may  not  share  information  with  the  criminal 
investigation that was compelled under “Garrity.”  

2. 

3. 

 

Upon completion of the criminal investigation of non-fatal incidents, FIT Section 
Lieutenant will notify CIRT. See the Critical Incident Review Team (5/109.04) and 
the Critical Incident Review Process (5/109.02) policies for further information.   
 
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW 

IV.

All  Use  of  Force  Reports  in  Blue  Team  will  be  completely  coordinated  through 
the officer’s chain of command and entered into IA Pro within 30 calendar days 
of  the  event.    Internal  Affairs  will  provide  a  monthly  report  to  the  appropriate 

1202 

 

 

