MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

Response to Resistance 

 
Definitions  ......................................................................................................................................2 
Investigations  .................................................................................................................................8 
Notification Procedures When Weapons are Fired  ....................................................................7 
Response to Resistance Continuum  .............................................................................................3 
Response to Resistance Form  .......................................................................................................4 
Response to Resistance Involving Animals  ...............................................................................11 
Review Procedures  ......................................................................................................................10 
Use of Deadly Force Prohibited  ...................................................................................................6 
Use of Deadly Force Authorized  ..................................................................................................5 
     Use of Deadly Force in Defense of Self or Others  ..................................................................5 
     Use of Deadly Force to Affect an Arrest  ................................................................................6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following policy will govern response to resistance and the investigative procedures thereof. 

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 1 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 
 

I.  Definitions  

 
A.  Violent Felony - A felony in which the suspect has used, threatened to use, or attempted to use 

force that can cause death or serious bodily injury. 

 
B.  Deadly Force - That amount of force that is sufficient to, intended to, or may be reasonably 

expected to inflict serious bodily injury and/or death. This includes the discharge of any firearm 
at, near, or in the direction of any individual. 

 
C.  Empty Hand Control – A method of control employed by an officer without the aid   of 

equipment or weapons.  This physical force is employed when it is necessary to overcome a 
subject’s physical resistance to an officer’s lawful objectives.  There are two subcategories: 
Soft and Hard Empty Hand Techniques. 

 
D.  Soft Empty Hand Techniques – This subcategory includes escort controls, touch pressure 
points, wrist or arm locks, and take down techniques that have a minimal chance of injury. 

 
E.  Hard Empty Hand Techniques – This subcategory includes kicks, punches or other striking 
techniques such as brachial stun or other strikes to key motor points that have a moderate 
chance of injury. 

 
F.  Probable Cause - Probable cause exists when facts and circumstances within an officer's 

knowledge, and of which he has reasonably trustworthy information, are sufficient to warrant a 
man of reasonable caution in believing that an offense has been, or is being committed, and that 
the suspect committed it.    

 
G.  Exhaustion of all Other Reasonable Means - All other reasonable means have been 

exhausted when an officer has tried to control conflict by using all alternate methods other than 
deadly force.  However, all other reasonable means may be considered to have been exhausted 
when an officer analyzes a set of circumstances and honestly and reasonably concludes that any 
other means will be ineffective, useless, or hazardous to the officer or some innocent third 
party. 

 
H.  Necessary Force – Necessary Force or “reasonable force” is force that can be reasonably used 
by an officer to accomplish their duties in a timely manner; force that keeps both the officer and 
citizen as safe as possible. Members are permitted to use whatever force is necessary and 
reasonable to protect others or themselves from bodily harm.    

 
I.   Excessive Force – Excessive force is defined as the amount of force which is beyond the need 

and circumstances of the particular event, or which is not justified in the light of all 
circumstances.   

 
 
 
J.   Unnecessary Force - Unnecessary Force is that force or violence that is unprovoked, 
needless, or not required when making an arrest or dealing with a prisoner or any  
Officers shall NEVER use Unnecessary Force.   

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

person. 

Chapter II   
Page 2 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

 

II. Response to Resistance Continuum 

 
The Memphis Police Department has provided a Response to Resistance Continuum for its 
officers to use as a guide in the Response to Resistance in general and the use of Deadly Force in 
particular.  
 
Officers should only use THE NECESSARY AMOUNT OF FORCE to safely accomplish their 
duties.  Officers should react to the amount of resistance shown by a suspect and then determine 
the amount of force that is reasonable and necessary to safely take this person into custody during a 
lawful arrest. (1.3.1) 
 
This idea of safety should include the officer(s) involved, the person(s) suspected of committing 
the offense, and any innocent third parties that may be involved as victims, witnesses, or 
bystanders. 
 
Any time there is an injury or an alleged injury as the result of any level of force used, officers will, 
upon properly restraining the subject, examine any person appearing injured or claiming injury and 
render the appropriate medical aid.  Officers will request paramedics to the scene as needed.  Any 
officer on the scene of an incident wherein he/ she is made aware of an injury or a claim of injury 
must immediately notify a supervisor.  The notified supervisor will ensure the incident is 
documented via the Response to Resistance Form and/or other appropriate documentation.  (1.3.5) 
 
The Response to Resistance Continuum uses an escalating/de-escalating format to determine 
how Officers should consider the response to resistance. Officers must quickly react and establish 
objective reasonableness according to circumstances and the totality of facts known to the officer at 
the time of the incident.  Officers are allowed to escalate their response to resistance in reaction to a 
particular situation as their experience and training dictate. Officers should also de-escalate their 
response to resistance when the situation is safely under control and a higher level of force is no 
longer necessary or reasonable. 
 
 

RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE CONTINUUM 

1.  Physical Presence 
2.  Verbal Warnings 
3.  Verbal Commands 
4.  Chemical Agents 
5.  Empty Hands Control (Soft and Hard) 
6.  Impact Weapons/Less Lethal Weapons/MPD Canine  
7.  Deadly Force 

 
 
 
 

NOTE: Officers must be aware that this is a dynamic continuum where an officer can be 
justified in instantly escalating from the lowest level of force to Deadly Force without having to 
stop and utilize each and every step in between. The Officer can also de-escalate from a higher 
level of force to one of the lower levels without stopping at each lower level. 
The Officer’s experience and training are his guides as to which level of force to use in each 

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 3 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

situation. 
 

III. Response to Resistance Form 

on all incidents involving: 

 
A.  It is the responsibility of the officer utilizing force to complete a Response to Resistance Form 

 

 

1. The discharge of a firearm (with the exception of recreation or training purposes). (1.3.6a) 
2. The use of any part of the officer’s body to compel compliance. This would include uses 

of force that fall in level 5 (Empty Hands Control) of the response to resistance continuum. 
(1.3.6d) 

3. Chemical agent use. (1.3.6c) 
4. SL-6/IDS and CEW events. (1.3.6c) 
5. The use of an MPD canine to apprehend a suspect. 
6. The use of the Baton/Expandable Baton. (1.3.6c) 
7. Whenever a suspect is charged with T.C.A. 39-16-602 Resisting Arrest. 
8. Whenever there is a death, injury, or an alleged injury to an officer or suspect(s), as a 

result of police action. (1.3.6b)  

 
B.  The Response to Resistance Form need not be completed for: 
 

1. The mere presence of police officers, or the issuance of tactical commands; or   
2. Routine or procedural physical contacts, which are necessary to effectively accomplish a 
legitimate law enforcement objective.  Examples include: guiding a subject into a police 
vehicle, holding the subject’s arm while escorting, handcuffing a subject, and maneuvering 
or securing a subject for a frisk. 

The Response to Resistance form will be submitted to the supervisor for approval prior to the 
end of the officer’s shift.  The Supervisor will ensure that the report has been completed, and 
will review the incident for any departmental concerns regarding policy and procedures, 
training, equipment and/or officer conduct.  If the Supervisor recognizes that one of these 
areas needs to be reviewed and addressed by the Memphis Police Department, only then will 
he/she submit the concerns in a memo and forward the memo with a copy of the Response to 
Resistance form to the Accreditation Office. The original copy of the Response to Resistance 
form is forwarded to Inspectional Services.  Copies of the Response to Resistance forms will 
also be forwarded to the appropriate Work Station/Bureau Commander, and the Firearms 
Training Unit. (1.3.7.c) 
The Response to Resistance Form is prepared as an internal administrative instrument.  The 
form will not be released to persons or agencies outside the Memphis Police Department 
without the prior approval of the Director of Police Services. 
 
All reported Response to Resistance incidents will be reviewed by the Inspectional Services 
Bureau. The Inspectional Services Bureau will be responsible for the maintenance of the 
original Response to Resistance Forms, as well as the data generated by the forms.  This 
review will examine the following elements of the incident: (1.3.7) 

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 4 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

 

•  Was department policy and procedure adhered to? 
•  Is the applicable policy clearly understandable and effective in covering the incident? 
•  Is current departmental response to resistance training adequate? 
•  Is department equipment adequate? 
•  Are there tactical issues that should be addressed in training? 

 
An annual analysis of response to resistance incidents will be submitted from the Commander 
of ISB to the Director of Police Services.  This report will summarize the data extracted from 
reported response to resistance incidents and include written recommendations regarding any 
policy or training issues that need to be addressed by the department.  All training issues 
should also be forwarded to the Commander of the Training Academy for review. (1.3.13) 
 

IV. Use of Deadly Force Authorized  

 

 
Officers shall use only the NECESSARY amount of force that is consistent with the 
accomplishment of their duties, and must exhaust every other reasonable means of prevention, 
apprehension, or defense before resorting to the use of deadly force (if the situation allows time for 
this). (1.3.2) 
 
 A.  Use of Deadly Force in Defense of Self or Others 

 

 

 Officers are authorized to use deadly force: 

 1.  In self-defense where the officer has been attacked with deadly force, is being  threatened 
with the use of deadly force, or where the officer has probable cause and reasonably 
perceives an immediate threat of deadly force; or 

 
 2.  In defense of others where a third party has been attacked with deadly force, is being 

threatened with the use of deadly force, is in danger of serious bodily injury or death;  or 
where the officer has probable cause and reasonably perceives an immediate threat of 
deadly force to a third party. 

 

 
 
 
 

B.  Use of Deadly Force to Affect an Arrest 
 

Officers are authorized to use deadly force to effect the arrest of a fleeing felon only when: 
 

1.  The officer has probable cause to believe the individual to be arrested has committed a 
felony involving the infliction or threatened infliction of serious bodily injury; AND 

 
2.  The officer has probable cause to believe that the individual to be arrested poses a threat 
of death or serious bodily injury, either to the officer or to others unless immediately 
apprehended; AND 

 
3.  Where feasible, the officer has identified himself/herself as a police officer and given 

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 5 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

warning such as, “STOP--POLICE--I'LL SHOOT,” that deadly force is about to be 
used unless flight ceases; AND 

 
4.  If all other means of apprehension available to the officer under the attendant 

circumstances have been exhausted. 

 

V.  Use of Deadly Force Prohibited 

 
 The use of DEADLY FORCE is prohibited in the following circumstances: 
 

A.  To apprehend or arrest a person for a misdemeanor offense; or 
 
B.  To effect the arrest of any person for escape from the commission of any misdemeanor 

offense; or 

 
C.  As warning shots [Warning shots will not be utilized under any circumstance (1.3.3)]; or 
 
D.  To apprehend or arrest a person known to be or believed to be a juvenile, unless the use of 

deadly force is immediately necessary in the defense of the officer's life or of another person’s 
life after all other reasonable means have been exhausted [The officer’s knowledge or belief of 
a person's age may be based upon factors such as the officer’s previous knowledge of the 
person, his observations of the person's appearance, or upon reliable information given to him 
by other persons]; or 

 
E.  To apprehend or arrest a person fleeing from a felony which is not a violent felony [This 
includes, but is not limited to, felonies such as auto theft, larceny, embezzlement, fraud, 
burglary of an auto, or any other felony, which does not involve the use of deadly force, 
attempted use of deadly force, or threatened use of deadly force]; or 

 
F.  From or at any moving vehicle, except in a case where an officer has probable cause to believe 
that the suspect committed a violent felony and the poses a direct threat of serious bodily 
injury or death to other persons if not immediately apprehended [If the officer is in the path of 
the vehicle, the officer’s first responsibility, if possible, is to move from the path of the 
oncoming vehicle, as shooting the driver of a moving vehicle raises the danger from an 
uncontrolled vehicle]; or   

G.  In any case, where the officer does not have a clear field of fire and cannot be reasonably 

certain that only the suspect will be hit and that the potential for harm to innocent persons is 
minimum. 

 

VI. Notification Procedures When Weapons Are Fired:  

 
When any officer of the Memphis Police Department discharges any firearm (with the exception of 
recreation or training purposes), whether on-duty or off-duty and regardless of the type of firearm, 
the officer will immediately report the incident to the dispatcher who will notify the proper 
supervisor. The appropriate supervisor will proceed to the scene of the shooting to begin an 
immediate investigation and notify the precinct or bureau commanders of the incident.   
 
Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 6 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 
It will be the responsibility of the first Supervisor on the scene to secure the crime scene, separate 
and secure the witnesses (both civilian and police), and contact the following via the 
Communications Supervisor: Inspectional Services (ISB); Homicide; Felony Response, (after 
hours) and CSI.  All weapons of officers involved in the initial incident are to remain holstered until 
a representative from Homicide, Inspectional Services and Crime Scene is prepared to check the 
weapon.  Because of the chain of evidence, it is paramount that only CSI or ISB personnel take 
possession of any police weapon and this is to be done only after a representative from Homicide, 
ISB and CSI is present.  An inner perimeter should be marked off with crime scene tape around the 
actual crime scene.  No one should enter the crime scene area, unless an emergency exists, until 
the Homicide Bureau and Inspectional Services arrive.  An outer perimeter should be established 
in order to assist with crowd control.  The Supervisor will immediately notify the dispatcher and 
appropriate Deputy Chief or Duty Chief if the incident occurs after regular business hours or on a 
weekend. 
 
The on-scene uniform commander will be responsible for returning uniform cars to service once it 
is determined they are no longer needed.  

A.  ISB, CSI, and Homicide Bureau will be notified and will respond for an on-the-scene 

investigation for all shooting incidents involving: 
 

1. Any shooting by an officer, either on-duty or off-duty, regardless of the weapon, which 

involves death or injury to oneself, a suspect, other officers, or a citizen; or 

2.  Any shooting by an officer, either on-duty or off-duty, regardless of the weapon, where a 
suspect has been shot or there is evidence that the suspect was shot and has not been 
located; or 

3.  Any incident where an officer has been shot by a suspect. 

 
Between 1600 hours and 0800 hours Felony Response will be notified and respond to the 
scene to provide a quick investigative response.  The Felony Response Supervisors and 
Investigators will aid in scene security and containment of witnesses until relieved by the 
Homicide Bureau.  
CSI will send a supervisor and two CSI officers to all police related shootings. 

B.  ISB, CSI, and Homicide will be notified for all shooting incidents involving: 

 

 

     

 

 

1.  Any shooting by an officer that occurs on-duty or off-duty, regardless of the weapon. 
2.  When an officer reports that they were attacked but not seriously injured. 
3.  When an officer has been shot at but not actually hit. 
4.  When an officer has fired their weapon at a suspect and there is no evidence that the     

suspect was shot.  

 
ISB and CSI will respond for a scene investigation regardless of the time of occurrence.  
Homicide will respond during daytime hours.  Between 1600 hours and 0800 hours Felony 
Response supervisors will be notified and respond to the scene with investigators to handle 
the preliminary investigation. Felony Response will assist with scene security and 
containment of witnesses.  

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 7 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

C.  ISB and CSI will be notified and respond for an on-scene investigation of all incidents 

involving: 

1.  Any shooting by an officer that occurs on-duty or off-duty, regardless of the weapon, 

resulting in property damage; or  

2.  Animal related shootings by an officer that occur on-duty. 

This policy excludes recreational use of personal firearms and training on legitimate firing 
ranges unless injury or death occurs. 

 

VII. Investigation 

commander.  

 

 
A.  The Commander of the Homicide Bureau (or a designee) will be the overall on-scene 

The primary objective of the ISB is to investigate all shooting incidents involving police officers 
either on-duty or off-duty.  This includes incidents where the use of deadly force is authorized, 
use of deadly force is prohibited or any accidental discharge(s).   

ISB will provide an on-scene debriefing area for the officers involved in discharging their 
weapons.  This area may be a room, van or any other location deemed appropriate by the ISB 
Commander.  This area will serve as a central point for filling out reports, checking weapons, 
issuing replacement weapons, and any other task necessary to complete the on-scene 
investigation.  An ISB member will be provided at this location to assist the officers with any 
issue that may arise.  No walk-through will be performed before ISB arrives.  The walk-
through will be done under the supervision of an ISB member.  The purpose is to insure the 
integrity of the scene.   

When a squad car is involved in an accident during a shooting incident, the Traffic Bureau will 
make the scene and take all necessary accident reports.   

B.  ISB will only investigate compliance with the department’s policy on the use of deadly 
force.  Any officer involved in a shooting incident where a suspect has been shot or there is 
evidence that the suspect was shot will be routinely relieved of duty with pay pending the 
outcome of the investigation.  (1.3.8) 

C.  The Homicide Bureau will be responsible for the criminal investigation.  The Homicide 

Bureau will be called to handle the investigation of the incident including obtaining statements, 
supplemental reports, state reports and presentation to the Shelby County Attorney General.  It 
will be at the discretion of the lead scene investigator whether additional bureaus will be 
contacted for assistance in the investigation. 

The following procedures shall be followed on all police related shootings where a police 
officer has been shot, a citizen has been shot or there are substantial facts to believe a suspect 
or citizen has been shot, regardless of their condition. These procedures will also apply to all 
in-custody deaths. 

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

•  The Homicide Bureau will be responsible for the on-scene investigation, because this is a 
procedure conducted by the Homicide Investigators on a regular basis. The oversight of 
Inspectional Services reinforces the integrity of the process.  

•  The only evidentiary photographs to be taken on the scene of a police shooting are by 

CSI, under the direction of the lead Homicide investigator and the Inspectional Services 
investigator. Photos will include both 35mm and digital photographs. A photo log will 
also be completed. CSI will tag all evidence, including the officer’s weapon. The officer’s 
weapon is evidence and is to be treated as such. The lead Homicide investigator will be 
responsible for ordering all evidentiary testing. A copy of the CSI report will be made 
available for the Inspectional Services’ file along with a copy of the photographs.  

•  The scene will be described in writing, evidence documented and procedures taken by the 

lead Homicide Investigator or Felony Response investigator.  

•  Entrance into a contained scene shall be limited to the Lead Homicide/Felony Response 

investigator and one investigator to assist if necessary, one Inspectional Services 
investigator, for observation and note taking for internal investigation only, CSI Officers, 
and Medical Examiner staff. After the scene has been completely processed, the 
Homicide Supervisor and Inspectional Services Supervisor will review the scene with the 
lead Homicide Investigator to ensure that all investigative measures have been taken. 
Inspectional Services should then conduct a walk-through.  

•  The Inspectional Services Bureau, Homicide or any other Investigative Bureau will not 

interview officers who have been involved in a critical incident until at least 48 hours has 
passed since the time of the critical incident.  This 48-hour provision will not preclude 
conducting interviews at the discretion of the Director of Police Services, his designee or 
the ISB, Homicide or any other Investigative Bureau Supervisor when circumstances 
dictate such.  Inspectional Services will retain the original officer’s statements and a copy 
will be provided to Homicide. 

•  Homicide Investigators, with Inspectional Service Investigators, will take live statements 
from all witnesses, including officer witnesses. The original statement will remain with 
the lead Homicide Investigator and a copy retained by Inspectional Services for their file.  

•  Within five (5) days of the scene investigation, a debriefing will take place with the lead 
investigator from Inspectional Services, Homicide, the Supervisor/Commander from 
both bureaus, and the Commander or assistant Commander of Investigative Services. 
This debriefing will cover the initial facts gathered and direction needed for a successful 
completion of the case. This debriefing will take place at Inspectional Services office.  
This can also be an opportunity for the involved investigating bodies to discuss problems 
and develop solutions to these problems. It will be the responsibility of the Commander 
of Inspectional Services and the Commander or assistant Commander of 
Investigations to brief the command staff.  

Homicide Bureau or Felony Response will handle criminal charges placed against a suspect 
wounded during the commission of a crime. 

 

VIII. Review Procedures 

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 9 

 

 
 
 
 

 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 

A.  Two Attorney General’s Homicide advisors will review the case independently at the 

conclusion of the initial investigation.  The initial investigation is concluded when all crime 
scene work is completed and all known statements, including officer statements, have been 
taken.  At the conclusion of this review, the Attorney General may recommend further 
investigative action, completion of the case and presentation to the grand jury for criminal 
prosecution, or indicate in writing that at this stage it appears the case will not be prosecutable. 
 The Homicide Commander will advise the command staff in writing as to the initial findings.  
 

B.  All reports, including the Response to Resistance Forms, Crime Scene Report, and Bureau 

Report, copies of arrest tickets, offense reports, and memos will be presented by Inspectional 
Services to the Director for review. 
 
Upon reviewing all initial reports, the Director will take the following action: 

 

 

 

•  Order new and / or any additional investigations as required; or 

•  Concur with the investigative findings that the officer(s) was justified in the use of       

deadly force and order notification of the officer of said findings by letter; or 

•  Concur with the investigative findings that the officer(s) was not justified in the use of 

deadly force and direct administrative processing of the Statement of Charges issued by 
Inspectional Services under the established disciplinary procedures. 

C.  The lead Homicide Investigator will complete the investigative file, including all reports, lab 
results, final autopsy report, and all evidentiary information along with a written summary of 
the facts. The Homicide Supervisor and Lt. Colonel of Investigative Services will review the 
investigative file within ten (10) working days and accept or order additional investigative 
measures. The Homicide file will then be forward to Inspectional Services for review and 
presentation to the Grand Jury Section of the Attorney General’s office for final review.  

D.  Upon completion of this review, the Inspectional Services Commander/Supervisor will notify 

the command staff of the final disposition. 

IX. Response to Resistance Involving Animals 

 
Officers should be aware that from time to time they will find themselves in a situation or receive a 
call that involves an animal that is causing a disturbance or is a threat to the officer or the 
community.  
 
TCA 39-14-202 prohibits unnecessary cruelty to animals, and while animals are considered 
property under the law and are NOT guaranteed protection under the United States Constitution 
and Bill of Rights, officers should attempt to adhere to the guidelines concerning force established 
in the Response to Resistance Continuum in their dealings with animals. This means that officers 
should use force that is reasonable and consistent with the accomplishment of their duties.  
 
The safety of the officer and the community should be the primary factor when officers make the 
Date: 09-11-13 
Chapter II   
Page 10 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
SECTION: Response to Resistance 
 
 
decision to use Deadly Force to control an animal. If a decision is made that, the animal must be 
shot in order to protect the officer or the community, the officer must make every effort to insure 
that the discharge of his weapon is done as safely as possible. The officer’s actions must be in 
conscious regard for both the foreground and background near the animal to minimize the danger 
to other officers, citizens and/or private property. The officer’s use of deadly force against an 
animal should be undertaken in such a manner that is humane, but unlikely to result in the animal’s 
undue suffering or escape.  
 
In addition, the officer must remain acutely aware of the potential danger that results from 
wounding a large frightened and/or vicious animal.  If the animal’s death is not immediate, officers 
are warned that the animal might become enraged and desperate, causing it to attack the officer or 
further threaten the safety of other citizens.  
 
If deadly force is used against an animal, the officer should notify the dispatcher who in turn will 
notify the appropriate supervisors, bureaus and departments for further action. Per Policy and 
Procedure, the officer will complete a Response to Resistance form.  

Date: 09-11-13 
Section 8: Response to Resistance 

Chapter II   
Page 11 

