 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MILWAUKEE POLICE DEPARTMENT  

STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
 
460 – USE OF FORCE 

GENERAL ORDER: 2015-17 
ISSUED: May 5, 2015 

EFFECTIVE: May 5, 2015 

ACTION: Amends General Order 2015-12 (March 27, 2015) 

REVIEWED/APPROVED BY:  
Captain Regina Howard 
DATE: April 23, 2015 
WILEAG  STANDARD(S):  5.1.1,  5.1.2,  5.1.3, 
5.1.4, 5.2.1, 5.3.1, 5.3.2, 5.3.3 

460.00  PURPOSE 

The purpose of this procedure is to provide instructions for the proper use of force by police 
members, provide a fair and impartial review of use of force incidents, determine whether 
the  actions  of  police  members  were  justified,  and  to  maintain  public  confidence  in  the 
Milwaukee Police Department. 

460.05  DISTURBANCE RESOLUTION MODEL (WILEAG 5.1.2, 5.1.4) 

 

It is the policy of the Milwaukee Police Department that all uses of force will comply with 
the state of Wisconsin Defense and Arrest Tactics (DAAT) Disturbance Resolution Model, 
Intervention Options, as outlined below: 

1.  APPROACH CONSIDERATIONS 

Decision Making 

Tactical Deployment 

Tactical Evaluation 

Justification 
Desirability 
Control of distance 
Positioning (relative positioning / relative 
positioning with multiple subjects) 
Team Tactics 
Threat Assessment Opportunities 
Officer/subject factors 
Special circumstances 
Level/stage/degree of stabilization: 

2.  INTERVENTION OPTIONS 

MODE 

Presence 
Dialogue 
Control Alternatives 

Protective Alternatives 

Deadly Force 

 

PURPOSE 
To present a visible display of authority 
To verbally persuade 
To overcome passive resistance, active resistance, or their threat 
To overcome continued resistance, assaultive behavior, or their 
threats 
To stop the threat 

a.  Department  authorized  and  issued  less  lethal  weapons  include  an  approved 
wooden baton, approved expandable baton, Taser X26 and Taser X-2, and MK-3 
(small canister) and MK-4 (large canister) Oleoresin Capsicum.  

 

1.  Members  shall  refer  to  SOP  465  Hand  Held  Chemical  Agent  and  SOP  467 
Electronic  Control  Device  regarding  the  use  of  Oleoresin  Capsicum  and 

 

 

 

 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 2 of 10 

electronic control devices, which are control alternatives. 

 
2.  The approved wooden baton and approved expandable baton are intermediate 
weapons under protective alternatives. The goal of using a baton is to impede a 
subject, preventing him or her from continuing resistive, assaultive, or otherwise 
dangerous behavior.   

b.   Department  authorized  and  issued  less  lethal  weapons  issued  to  the  Tactical 

Enforcement Unit include: 

 

 

 

 
3.  Members shall refer to the Tactical Enforcement Unit SOI regarding the use of 

less lethal weapons issued to the Tactical Enforcement Unit. 

  

3.  FOLLOW-THROUGH CONSIDERATIONS 

 

Stabilize 
Monitor/Debrief 

Search 
Escort 
Transport 
Turn over/Release 

Application of restraints, if necessary 
Maintain alertness (subject’s condition, etc) / Communication (normalize 
scene) 
If appropriate 
If necessary 
If necessary 
Removal of restraints, if necessary 

Note:  Police  members  shall  be  trained  and  qualified  in  the  safe  and  proficient 
use of department authorized and issued firearms. Police members shall 
be required to qualify with a state certified department firearms instructor 
prior to being authorized to carry  such firearms and shall be required to 
maintain  their  qualification  in  order  to  ensure  continual  safe  and 
proficient  firearm  use.  All  sworn  members  shall  receive  a  copy  and 
demonstrate their understanding of this directive before being authorized 
to carry any firearm.  
(WILEAG 5.1.2.2) 

                             
 

460.10   OBJECTIVE REASONABLENESS (WILEAG 5.1.1) 

The  use  of  force  by  a  police  member  must  be  objectively  reasonable.  Police  members 
shall use only the force necessary to effectively maintain control of a situation and protect 
the safety of police members and the public. Objective reasonableness is judged from the 
perspective of a reasonable police member facing similar circumstances and is based on 
the  totality  of  the  facts  known  to  the  police  member  at  the  time  the  force  was  applied, 
along  with  the  member’s  prior  training  and  experience,  without  regard  to  the  underlying 
intent or motivation of the police member. 

REDACTEDREDACTED 

 

 

 

 
 

 

   

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 3 of 10 

460.15  AMOUNT OF FORCE (WILEAG 5.1.2, 5.1.3) 

 

A.  Force that is intended or likely to cause great bodily harm or death, may only be used: 

1.  If  reasonable  under  all  the  circumstances  then  existing  to  prevent  great  bodily 

harm or death to the officer or a third party;  

 
2.  When necessary to prevent a suspect's escape and the officer has probable cause 
to believe that the suspect presently poses a significant threat of great bodily harm 
or death to the officer or others;  
(WILEAG 5.1.2.1) 

 
 
3.   To  kill an  animal if  the  officer or another person  is threatened  with  serious  bodily 
harm by the animal or otherwise to provide for the safety of the general public; or 

 
4.  To kill an animal that has been so badly injured that its destruction would prevent 

further suffering. 

       

B.  Police  members  may  draw  or  display  their  firearms  in  circumstances  where  they 
reasonably believe it may be necessary to use their firearm in the performance of their 
duties.  

 
C.  The  firing  of  warning  shots  is  prohibited.  When  feasible,  a  verbal  warning  should  be 

given prior to the use of force likely to cause great bodily harm or death. 

460.20  DUTY TO INTERVENE  

that  which 

to  be  beyond 

Any  officer  who  personally  observes  another  officer  using  force,  which  the  observing 
officer  believes 
the 
circumstances, shall reasonably attempt to intervene to prevent the use of such excessive 
force, if the observing  officer is in a position to do so, and if any such intervention does 
not 
their 
observations,  along  with  his/her  own  intervening  actions  to  a  supervisor.  A  failure  to 
intervene  in  any  unreasonable  use  of  force,  when  there  is  an  opportunity  to  do  so, 
demonstrates a lack of courage, and a violation of the Code of Conduct. 

intervening  officer  shall  promptly  report 

is  objectively  reasonable  under 

jeopardize  safety.  Any  such 

460.25  DISCHARGE OF FIREARM INCIDENTS (WILEAG 5.3.3) 

A.  SHOOTING OF ANIMALS 
 

Whenever a police member shoots an animal and there is no personal injury or property 
damage, and all rounds are accounted for, the member’s field supervisor shall conduct 
the use of force investigation and file the Use of Force Report in the AIM system, unless 
directed otherwise by higher authority. The supervisor shall indicate in the subject tab, 
the  type  of  animal  (e.g.,  dog,  deer)  and  fill  out  the  applicable  subject  details  (e.g., 
injuries, photos, animal breed).  

 
B.  ACCIDENTAL / UNINTENTIONAL DISCHARGE 
 

Whenever  a  police  member  accidentally  or  unintentionally  discharges  a  firearm 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 4 of 10 

460.30  RESTRICTIONS ON DISCHARGING FIREARMS 

regardless  of  personal  injury  or  property  damage,  the  respective  Geographic 
Investigations Division shift commander shall be notified and make the determination 
who  shall  be  assigned  to  conduct  the  use  of  force  investigation  and  file  the  Use  of 
Force Report. 

C.  INTENTIONAL DISCHARGE 
 

Whenever a police member intentionally discharges a firearm at a person (regardless of 
whether personal injury or property damage occurs), the member shall promptly notify 
his/her  shift  commander  of  such  fact.  The  shift  commander  shall  promptly  notify  the 
respective  Geographic  Investigations  Division  shift  commander,  who  shall  assign  a 
police  lieutenant  to  conduct  the  use  of  force  investigation  and  file  the  Use  of  Force 
Report. 

 
D.  ASSIGNMENT TO ADMINISTRATIVE DUTY 
 

Whenever  a  police  member’s  actions  or  use  of  force  results  in  death  or  great  bodily 
harm  to  another,  the  member  shall  be  placed  on  administrative  duty  pending  an 
administrative review.     

A.  Discharging a firearm at or from a moving vehicle shall only be done in the following 
circumstances and only when all other reasonable  alternatives have been exhausted 
or deemed unacceptable. 

1.  A  police  member  shall  not  discharge  a  firearm  at  the  driver  or  occupant(s)  of  a 
moving  vehicle,  or  the  vehicle  itself,  unless  deadly  physical  force  is  being  used 
against  the  police  member  or  another  person  by  means  other  than  a  moving 
vehicle,  or,  the  moving  vehicle  poses  an  imminent  and  ongoing  threat  of 
substantial physical harm to the police member or another person from which there 
is  no  reasonable  means  to  escape,  and  the  risks  are  outweighed  by  the  need  to 
use deadly physical force. Once the threat of the moving vehicle ceases, a police 
member shall not discharge his or her firearm at the vehicle. 

 
2.  Police  members  shall  not  intentionally  place  themselves  to  either  the  front  or  the 
rear  of  a  moving  vehicle’s  path.  If  they  find  themselves  in  danger  from  a  moving 
vehicle,  they  shall  attempt  to  move  out  of  the  way,  if  possible,  rather  than 
discharge their firearm. Firing at a moving vehicle will not, in most circumstances, 
stop the vehicle. Further, should the driver be wounded or killed, the vehicle may 
still continue in motion. 

 
3.  A police member shall not discharge a firearm from a moving vehicle unless deadly 
physical  force  is  being  used  against  the  police  member  or  another  person  by 
means other than a moving vehicle (e.g., fired upon), and the risks are outweighed 
by the need to use deadly force. 

 
4.  Police members shall not reach into or place any part of their bodies inside a driver 

occupied vehicle during a traffic stop or field interview. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 5 of 10 

460.35  USE OF FORCE REPORT (PF) (WILEAG 5.2.1, 5.3.1, 5.3.2) 

 

A.  PURPOSE 

The Use of Force Report is designed to document those incidents involving the use of 
force by department members as described herein. The report shall be completed by a 
supervisory  officer  of  a  higher  rank  than  the  member  that  used  force,  except  for 
supervisors  assigned  to  the  Internal  Affairs  Division  (IAD)  who  can  investigate  and 
complete a Use of Force Report for any department member. 
 

B.  WHEN TO FILE REPORT 

1.  The  Use  of  Force  Report  shall  be  completed  by  a  supervisory  officer  when  a 

department member: 
 
  Discharges  a  firearm  except  in  a  training  situation  or  for  lawful  recreational 

purposes. 

 
  Uses a baton in the line of duty. 
 
  Discharges an irritant, chemical, or inflammatory agent. 

 

  Deploys  an  electronic  control  device,  to  include  non-contact  spark  display, 
contact stun and probe deployment. However, non-contact spark display used as 
a test of functionality does not require the filing of a report. 

 
  Department canine bites a person. 
 
  Forcible blood draws requiring use of force to obtain a sample where a subject 

claims injury or is injured as a result of police action. 

 
  Uses  bodily 

decentralizations to the ground. 

force 

that 

involves 

focused  strikes,  diffused  strikes,  or 

 
  Uses any type of force in which a person is injured or claims injury, whether or 

not the injury is immediately visible. 
(WILEAG 5.3.1.1, 5.3.1.2, 5.3.1.3, 5.3.1.4) 
 
Note:  When  in  doubt  as  to  whether  a  use  of  force  incident  should  be 
documented on a Use of Force Report, notify your shift commander 
or immediate supervisor for guidance and direction. 

Following  the  use  of  lethal  or  less  lethal  weapons,  or  other 
applications  of  force  by  police  members,  timely  medical  aid  shall 
be  provided.  This  may  include  detecting  obvious  change  in 
condition  or  behavior,  clearing  chemical  agents  from  the  eyes, 
providing  first  aid,  evaluation  by  paramedics  or  immediate  aid  by 
medical professionals.      

 
          

 

2.  The supervisor responsible for filing a Use of Force Report shall obtain a number in 

 

 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 6 of 10 

the  AIM  system  prior  to  securing  from  duty  on  the  date  in  which  the  incident 
occurred.  The  member(s)  and  subject(s)  names,  date,  time  and  location  of  the 
incident shall also be entered on the same date the number was generated.           

 
3.  In  any  situation  which  triggers  the  filing  of  a  Use  of  Force  Report  photographs 
must  be  taken  of  the  subject  against  whom  force  was  used,  to  illustrate  any 
injury or lack thereof. 
 

 
4.  The  Use  of  Force  Report  is  to  be  completed  and  tracked  to  the  appropriate 
supervisor/shift  commander  within  3  days  of  the  incident.  A  critical incident  Use  of 
Force Report shall be filed in accordance with section 460.35.  

 
5.  Each  subsequent  review  by  the  shift  commander/commanding  officer  shall  be 

completed and tracked in an expeditious manner. 

 
6.   Reports  shall  be  thoroughly  completed  and  reviewed  within  seventeen  (17)  days 
following  the  date  on  which  the  incident  occurred  and  then  tracked  to  the  Internal 
Affairs Division. 

 
7.   The Internal Affairs Division shall review reports within fourteen (14) days following 

receipt from the commanding officer of that work location.  

 

C.  NOTIFICATION 

1.  Members  using  force  as  described  in  460.35(B)  shall,  as  soon  as  possible,  notify 
their  immediate  supervisor.  The  supervisor  shall  determine  if  the  use  of  force 
resulted in injury, great bodily harm, or death to a person. 

 
2.  Department members having knowledge of uses of force as described in 460.35(B) 

shall as soon as possible also notify their immediate supervisor. 

 
3.  If the use of force resulted in great bodily harm or death to a person, or if injury was 
sustained  as  a  result  of  the  member’s  use  of  a  firearm,  the  supervisor  shall  notify 
his/her  shift  commander.  The  shift  commander  shall  then  notify  the  respective 
Geographic Investigations Division shift commander. 

 
4.  Whenever  a  police  member  intentionally  discharges  a  firearm  at  a  person 
(regardless  of  whether  personal  injury  or  property  damage  occurs),  the  member 
shall  promptly  notify  his/her  shift  commander  of  such  fact.  That  shift  commander 
shall  promptly  notify  the  respective  Geographic  Investigations  Division  shift 
commander.   

 
5.  All Other Types of Force 
 

If  the  use  of  force  did  not  involve  great  bodily  harm  or  death  to  a  person,  but 
involved  a  use  of  force  as  otherwise  listed  above,  the  responding  supervisor  shall 
notify  his/her  shift  commander.  The  shift  commander  may  consult  with  the 
respective  Geographic  Investigations  Division  shift  commander  to  determine  if  the 
field supervisor or a police lieutenant shall conduct the use of force investigation and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 7 of 10 

complete  the  Use  of  Force  Report.  The  respective  Geographic  Investigations 
Division  shift  commander  shall  assign  a  police  lieutenant  to  investigate  the  more 
serious or complex use of force incidents. 

 

Following are specific directions for completing the Use of Force Report: 

D.  SPECIFIC DIRECTIONS 

1.  General Information  

 

a.  Complete all fields (e.g., incident type, dates, times, address, and status).  
 
b.  The  address,  the  location  of  the  subject  at  the  time  the  use  of  force  was 

initiated, must be verified. 

 
c.  Details: Indicate the location and lighting of the use of force. Indicate if video or 
audio  was  available  and  the  name  of  the  supervisor  who  reviewed  the  video. 
An electronic (CD/DVD) copy of the video should be forwarded to IAD. Identify 
all citizen witnesses and include their name, sex, race, birth date, address, and 
phone number. For department members who are witnesses, complete only the 
name  field  using  rank  and  name.  For  more  than  three  witnesses,  include  all 
others in the notes/narrative section.  

2.  Subject  –  Identify  the  person  who  was  the  object  of  the  use  of  force.  If  several 
people were the objects of the force in a single incident, enter all subjects under the 
subject tab and complete all subject details.  

 
3.  Employees – Identify all members who used force in the incident by entering them 
under the employee tab and linking them to the subject(s). Complete all employee 
details, including use of force details. Members  who  were present,  but did not use 
force, are to be included in the details-witness fields. 

a.  Duty status: All members taking action in their official capacity are on duty. For 
the  purpose  of  this  report,  indicate  “Off  Duty”  if  the  member  was  off  duty 
immediately prior to the incident. 

 
b.  Number of officer(s): Indicate whether the member was assigned to a one-officer 

or two-officer unit at the time of the incident.   

 
c.  Type  of  force  used:  Indicate  the  type(s)  of  force  used  (e.g.,  ECD,  bodily  force, 

firearm). 

 
d.  Bodily  force:  Indicate  yes  or  no.  Identify  through  use  of  DAAT  terminology  the 
specific  type  of  force  employed,  followed  by  a  bodily  force  description.  For 
example:  compliance  hold  (pressure  points,  come-along);  decentralization; 
focused strike (hand, forearm, kick); or diffused strike, etc. 

 
e.  Baton: Indicate yes or no, the type, and the number of strikes.   
 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 8 of 10 

 

 

 

f. 

 
g. 

 
h. 
 
i. 
 
j. 
 
k. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

4.  Notes: Describe in a detailed narrative the incident and events leading to the use of 
force.  Statements  shall  be  separately  obtained  and  documented  from  the  person 
the force was used against, from the officer(s) using force, and from all citizen and 
officer witnesses. An explanation of why there was no statement obtained from any 
of the aforementioned shall also be included.  

 

E.  ADDITIONAL REPORTS AND INVESTIGATION 

1.  A  written  report  from  the  member  who  uses  force  as  defined  in  this  order  is  not 
required  if  such  member  has  given  a  detailed  statement  to  the  respective 
Geographic Investigations Division lieutenant or the field supervisor. However, this 
does not preclude further statements, or written reports by the member using force 
when so directed by the Chief of Police. 

 
2.  Whenever  the  use  of  force  by  a  member  is  investigated  as  a  personnel 
investigation, a claim, a notice of injury, or a summons and complaint is filed with 
the city of Milwaukee naming a member of the department, the member in question 
shall  submit  additional  reports  or  provide  statements  when  so  directed  by  a 
supervisor. 

F.  INTERNAL AFFAIRS DIVISION RESPONSIBILITIES 

1.  IAD  shall  be  responsible  for  the  retention  of  all  Use  of  Force  Reports  via  the  AIM 

system. 

 
2.  The commanding officer of IAD shall provide the Use of Force Report to the Police 

Academy for training purposes. 

 
3.  Use  of  force  data  will  be  analyzed  /  audited  on  a  regular  basis  by  the  Internal 

Affairs Division. 

G.  COMMANDING OFFICER'S REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION 

1.  The member’s commanding officer shall review the AIM system Use of Force Report 

REDACTEDREDACTEDREDACTEDREDACTEDREDACTEDREDACTED 

 

 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 9 of 10 

and  enter  a  recommendation  under  “Incident  Tracking”.  When  the  commanding 
officer  determines  the  use  of  force  is  in  compliance,  these  reports  shall  be 
forwarded  through  “Incident Tracking” and  general information  “Status”  directly  to 
the appropriate supervisor of the Internal Affairs Division. 

 
2.  If  the  review  finds  the  member’s  use  of  force  was  not  in  compliance,  training  is 
needed, or if there are serious injuries requiring admission to a hospital or if death 
occurs,  the  commanding  officer  shall  enter  a  recommendation  under  “Incident 
Tracking”.  These  reports  shall  be  forwarded  through  “Incident  Tracking”  and 
general  information  “Status”  directly  to  their  respective  bureau  commander. 
Commanding  officers  may,  at  any  other  time  they  believe  notification  to  their 
bureau commander is warranted, forward the Use of Force Report to their bureau 
commander. 

 

460.40  USE OF FORCE COMMITTEE 

A.  A Use of Force Committee shall conduct periodic comprehensive reviews of all use of 

force issues affecting the department. 

 
B.  The Chief of Police shall appoint police members to the Use of Force Committee, who 
shall  serve  a  one-year  term,  subject  to  extension  at  the  discretion  of  the  Chief  of 
Police. 
 

C.  The department’s range master and a supervisor from Office of Management Analysis 
and Planning shall be standing members of the Use of Force Committee and shall not 
be subject to the aforementioned term limit. 

 
D.  The  Use  of  Force  Committee  shall  meet  quarterly,  or  as  otherwise  directed  by  the 

Chief of Police, and shall focus on, but not be limited to, the following: 

  Appropriateness of use of force by department members. 
  Proper field supervision and supervisory review of use of force incidents. 
  Application  and  effectiveness  of  department  policies  and  procedures  concerning 

the use of force. 

  Proper use and effectiveness of equipment. 
  Effectiveness of use of force training. 
 

Identification of training needs and opportunities for department members. 

E.  The Use of Force Committee shall prepare a written report of the committee’s finding 
and/or recommendations, and submit such report to the Chief of Police within ten (10) 
days of the completed quarterly or directed review.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

General Order 2015-17 

USE OF FORCE 

Page 10 of 10 

F.  Any  recommendations  or  other  matters  for  consideration  by  the  Use  of  Force 
Committee  shall  be  forwarded  through  the  chain  of  command  to  the  Office  of  the 
Chief. 
 
 
 

     

EDWARD A. FLYNN 
CHIEF OF POLICE  

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EAF:mfk                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

