Title 11:  Use of Force 

11.10  Use of Force 

The Metropolitan Nashville Police Department recognizes and respects 
the value and special integrity of each human life.  When investing police 
employees with the lawful authority to use force to protect the public 
welfare, a careful balancing of all human interests is required.  

  

11.10.010  It is the policy of the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department that 

authorized employees shall use only that force that is reasonably 
necessary to effect lawful objectives. Therefore, intentional misuse 
of the authority granted under this policy is grounds for disciplinary 
action up to and including those outlined in category A of 
established policy for Discipline and Corrective Action.  
 
This policy is for Metropolitan Nashville Police Department use only and 
does not apply in any criminal or civil legal proceedings.  This department 
policy should not be construed as the creation of a higher legal standard 
of care.  Violation of this directive will only form the basis for departmental 
administrative sanction. 
 

11.10.020  Definitions Specific to Use of Force 

 

 

A.  Absolutely Necessary: All other options have been exhausted, 

unavailable, or are not feasible. 
 

B.  Active Aggression: Where the employee’s attempt to gain lawful 
compliance has culminated in the perception of an attack, or the 
potential for such an attack, on the employee or others.  The employee 
makes the reasonable assessment that such actions by the subject 
would not result in serious bodily injury or death to the employee or 
others. 
 

C.  Active Resistance: A subject whose non-compliance includes 

resistive movements or physical defiance. 

 
D.  Aggravated Active Aggression: Where the employee’s attempt to 

gain lawful compliance has culminated in the perception of an attack or 
the potential for such an attack on the employee or others.  The 
employee makes the reasonable assessment that such actions by the 
subject could result in serious bodily injury or death to the employee or 
others. 

 
 

 

648E.  Authorized Weapons and Ammunition:  Weapons and ammunition 
approved by the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department Chief of 
Police and the Training Division for which authorized employees 
receive departmentally approved safety and proficiency training. 

 
F.  Conducted Energy Device (CED):  A hand-held device that is 

designed to subdue persons and/or animals. The device uses a low 
dose electrical current to temporarily stun and immobilize. Currently, 
the departmentally approved CEDs are the Taser® Model M26, 
Taser® Model X26 or Taser® Model X26P. 

 
G.  Deadly Force:  Any use of force reasonably calculated to produce 

death or serious bodily injury. 

 
H.  Defensive Force:  Use of hands, feet, or any other defensive 

equipment to overcome violent resistance or to protect self or others 
from assault or injury. 

 
I.  Excited Delirium:  A state of extreme mental and physiological 

excitement, characterized by extreme agitation (including shouting and 
disruptive behavior), hyperthermia, excessive watering of the eyes, 
hostility, paranoia or panic, inappropriate nudity, exceptional strength 
and endurance without fatigue. 

 
J.  Force-Continuum:  Broad categories of force, in identifiable 

escalating/de-escalating stages of intensity, in response to a subject's 
action.  They are commonly identified as official presence, verbal 
direction, soft empty-hand control, hand-held chemical spray/electronic 
immobilization device, hard empty-hand control, batons, and firearms. 
A subject's action may be defined in broad categories including full 
compliance to commands, verbal uncooperativeness, passive 
resistance, active resistance, active aggression, and aggravated active 
aggression (deadly force). 

 
K.  Injury:  Includes any physical pain, illness, or any impairment of 

physical condition. 

 
L.  Less Lethal Devices:  A device that is designed to reduce the 

potential of causing serious bodily injury or death. 

 
M.  Lethal Weapon:  Any weapon reasonably calculated to produce death 

or serious bodily injury. 

 
N.  Non-Deadly Force:  Any use of force other than that which is 

considered deadly force. 

 

649O.  Passive Resistance: A non-compliant subject who offers no sign of 
physical defiance or resistive movement towards an employee’s 
efforts. 

 
P.  Physical Force:  The application of a technique, action, or device to 

compel a change in the actions of another person; usually compliance 
with a desired behavior, submission to authority, or to de-escalate a 
threatening behavior.  

 
Q.  Positional Asphyxia:  Positional asphyxia is a position that can 

produce unconsciousness or death caused by a lack of oxygen or an 
increase of carbon dioxide in the blood. 

 
R.  Reasonable Belief:  The facts or circumstances the employee knows, 
or should know, are such as to cause an ordinary and prudent person 
to act or think in a similar way under similar circumstances. 

 
S.  Restraining Force:  Force which is limited to holding and restraining 
persons, which shall include arm-lock and takedown holds, but shall 
not include neck restraints. 

 
T.  Serious Bodily Injury:  Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of 

death, causes serious permanent disfigurement, or results in long-term 
loss or impairment of the functioning of any bodily member or organ. 
 

U.  Verbal Uncooperativeness:  A compliant subject who offers no sign 
of physical defiance or resistive movement towards an employee’s 
efforts, yet verbalizes resistance to instructions. 

11.10.030  Parameters for Non-Deadly Force 

 
A.  When the use of force is needed, if feasible, authorized employees will 

identify themselves and determine which options in the force 
continuum will best de-escalate the situation in the most safe, 
reasonable, and prudent manner possible. 
 

B.  Authorized employees are permitted to use department authorized 

non-deadly force techniques and equipment for resolution of incidents 
to: 

 

 

1.  Protect themselves or another from bodily injury; 
2.  Restrain or subdue a resistant person for whom there is probable 

cause to arrest or reasonable suspicion to stop; 

3.  Prevent damage to property; and/or 
4.  Bring an unlawful situation in which there is lawful authority for the 

employee to intervene, safely and effectively under control.  

  

650 

 

 

C.  Authorized employees may use department issued or approved hobble 
restraints and approved custodial restraint techniques on subjects who 
have been combative to reduce the likelihood of self-inflicted injury or 
to control further resistance while handcuffed.  Employees are not 
permitted to use hobble restraints, leg shackles, plastic ties, or any 
other device to place any subject in a manner which is likely to produce 
positional asphyxia. 
 

D.  Any use of force on subjects who are handcuffed or otherwise in 

custody is prohibited unless physical resistance must be overcome.  
Such uses of force must be specifically articulated-with an emphasis 
on why a particular level of force used was necessary to obtain 
compliance.   

 
E.  Authorized employees are permitted to use only that force which is 
reasonable and necessary under the particular circumstances to 
protect themselves or others from bodily injury, and only after other 
reasonable alternatives have been exhausted or it is determined that 
such alternative action(s) would be ineffective under the 
circumstances. 
 

F.  Flight alone shall not justify the use of any level of force beyond official 

presence or verbal direction on a suspect. An officer must have 
reasonable suspicion or probable cause to believe that the suspect has 
committed or is about to commit a criminal offense before utilizing 
force greater than verbal direction. 
 

A.  When discharging chemical spray on an individual or animal that is 

within the parameters for the use of non-deadly force, the authorized 
employee shall: 

1.  Give the verbal warning of “clear” to alert other personnel that the 
spray is about to be used so they can create a safe distance 
between themselves and the target of the spray; and 

2.  Use a short burst and only the number of bursts necessary to 

achieve the desired effect of temporarily immobilizing the individual 
being sprayed; and 

3.  Use at a maximum distance of fifteen (15) feet, and a minimum 

distance of three (3) feet from the target person; and  

4.  When possible, discharge the spray from his/her strong hand; and 

 

 

 

11.10.040  Use of Chemical Spray 

651 

 

 

5.  Follow all other techniques and/or instructions taught or 

disseminated by Metropolitan Nashville Police Department Training 
Division personnel. 

B.  Storage & Security 

 
1.  Chemical spray shall be securely stored at all times when not in 

2.  An employee shall keep issued chemical spray out of reach of 

use.  

children at all times. 

C.  Further provisions regarding chemical spray: 
 

1.  All Metropolitan Nashville Police Department sworn personnel and 
other authorized employees shall be trained in the proficient use of 
chemical spray, in accordance with the training provided by 
Metropolitan Nashville Police Department Training Division 
personnel. 

 
2.  Authorized employees are only allowed to carry departmentally 

issued chemical sprays. 

 
3.  Chemical spray is to be carried only in a department approved 

holster, on the front side of the utility belt in a manner consistent 
with established training. 

 
4.  Authorized employees will be issued one container of chemical 
spray by Training Division personnel and can obtain another 
container after a discharge (when over half of a can is used), if 
he/she brings the used container to the Training Division. Training 
Division personnel will attempt to verify that an MNPD Form 108, 
Use of Force Report is on file that describes the employee’s use of 
the chemical spray before issuing the new container. 

 

of the employee. 

5.  Carrying of a chemical spray while off-duty shall be at the discretion 

 
6.  Authorized employees will not carry a chemical spray onto any 

airplane or helicopter. 

 
7.  Prior to using the chemical spray on an individual driving or in 

physical control of a vehicle, the employee(s) shall immobilize the 
individual’s vehicle to prohibit it from moving during the incident, or 
ensure the vehicle would not pose an unreasonable risk to persons 
or property should chemical spray be deployed. All incidents of use 

652will be consistent with established departmentally approved 
training. 

 
8.  Authorized employees should not use a chemical spray in the 

vicinity of infants. 

 
9.  Any use of a chemical spray not consistent with established 

departmental policy or departmental training is expressly prohibited, 
and may result in disciplinary action. 

 
10. Violation of departmental policies or training governing the use of 
chemical spray by an employee may result in remedial training, 
corrective or disciplinary action. 
 

11.10.050  Use of Conducted Energy Device Taser® 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A.  The department may issue or make available a Conducted 
Energy Device (CED) to authorized employees who have 
successfully completed specialized training and qualification in 
the operation and use of these devices. 

  

Currently, the only departmentally approved CED is the Taser® 
Model M26, Taser® Model X26P or the Taser® Model X26. 
 

B.  CEDs should be fired from the strong hand only. Additionally, 
CEDs should NEVER be held in the hand at the same time as 
the pistol. 

 
C.  Authorized employees who are qualified by the MNPD to carry a 
Taser® may individually purchase and carry a departmentally 
approved Taser®. 

11.10.060  Taser® / CED Training & Certification 

A.  Taser® training shall be provided by the Metro Police Training 
Division to authorized employees. Such training shall be 
consistent with approved lesson plans. 

B.  Only those authorized employees who successfully complete 

and maintain certification may carry and/or deploy the Taser®. 

C.  To ensure proficiency, authorized employees will be required to 
successfully complete departmental Taser® training updates. 
This training shall, at a minimum, be provided annually. 

653 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.10.070  Taser® Inspection & Storage 

A.  If a Taser® is individually assigned, the employee will perform a spark 
test at the beginning of each shift to ensure that the device is charged 
and properly functioning and/or other such inspection as 
recommended by the manufacturer.  

 
B.  If a Taser® is not individually assigned, the supervisor of the assigned 
unit will ensure that a spark test is performed at the beginning of each 
shift to ensure that the device is charged and properly functioning 
and/or other such inspection as recommended by the manufacturer. 

C.  Storage & Security 
 

1.  The Taser® shall be securely stored at all times when not in use.  
2.  An employee storing a Taser® shall be responsible for the safety 
and security of the Taser® unless another employee assumes 
responsibility for the device. 

3.  An employee shall keep the Taser® and cartridges out of reach of 

children at all times. 

D.  The Taser® shall be inspected, and its information noted, consistent 

with established policy and procedure governing departmental 
inspections. 

11.10.080  Taser® Deployment 

A.  Deployment 

 
1.  The Taser® may be deployed consistent with established 
policy and procedure governing the force continuum.  The 
Taser® is considered an “intermediate” level of force 
between soft empty-hand control techniques and hard 
empty-hand control techniques and may be deployed as 
appropriate. 

2.  Fleeing Suspect: All other provisions of this order 

notwithstanding, there must be probable cause to justify the 
arrest of a fleeing suspect for a criminal offense prior to 
utilizing the Taser® to effect the arrest.  

 
B.  When deploying the Taser®, probes or stun, at or upon an 

individual or animal that is within the parameters for the use of 
non-deadly force, the authorized employee shall:  
 

6541.  Whenever possible, give the verbal warning of “Taser!” to 

alert other personnel that the Taser® is about to be used so 
they can create a safe distance between themselves and the 
target; 
 

2.  Deploy the Taser® consistent with department-approved 
training.  Use only the minimum number of bursts and the 
minimum duration reasonably necessary to achieve the 
desired effect of temporarily immobilizing the individual or 
animal; 
 

3.  When possible, one authorized employee should deploy the 
Taser® while a cover employee is prepared with a standard 
weapon;  
 

4.  Employees should take the suspect into custody as soon as 
possible after deploying the Taser® thereby minimizing the 
number and duration of bursts necessary while realizing that 
the suspect may not be able to respond to commands during 
or immediately following a burst;  

5.  Follow all other techniques and/or instructions taught or 

disseminated by Metropolitan Nashville Police Department 
Training Division personnel; and  

6.  Employees shall be aware that first responders from the 
Metropolitan Fire Department have developed specific 
protocols when responding to calls where the Taser® has 
been utilized. To ensure the safety of suspects where a 
Taser® has been deployed, officers shall: 

 

 

 

a.  Where feasible, notify the Metropolitan Fire Department 
prior to deploying the Taser® on a subject exhibiting 
behavior characteristic of, or similar to, Excited Delirium; 
or 

b.  When prior notification is not possible on a subject that is 
exhibiting behavior similar to Excited Delirium, notify the 
Metropolitan Fire Department immediately after the 
Taser® has been utilized. 

 

7.  None of the above provisions shall preclude an employee 

from notifying the Metropolitan Fire Department and request 
assistance in any other circumstance wherein the presence 
of medical personnel may be appropriate. 
 

C.  Further provisions regarding the Taser®: 

655 
1.  Authorized employees are only allowed to carry the 
departmentally authorized Taser® units and only 
departmentally issued Taser® cartridges while on or off duty. 
 

2.  The Taser® is to be carried in a department approved 

holster (on the front side of the utility belt in a cross-draw 
position), secured in the vehicle, or other approved method. 

3.  Carrying of the Taser® while off-duty shall be at the 

discretion of the authorized employee.  

4.  Prior to using the Taser® on an individual driving or in 
physical control of a vehicle, the employee(s) shall 
immobilize the individual’s vehicle to prohibit it from moving 
during the incident, or ensure the vehicle would not pose an 
unreasonable risk to persons or property should the Taser® 
be deployed. All incidents of use will be consistent with 
established departmentally approved training. 
 
The Taser® shall not be used on persons known to have 
been exposed to flammable liquids or sprayed with a 
chemical spray containing a flammable propellant, or in a 
location near flammable liquids or where flammable gasses 
are known to be present. 

5.  The Taser® should not be used on persons who are visibly 

pregnant or are at the extremes of age or physically disabled 
UNLESS there are compelling reasons to do so which can 
be clearly articulated. 

6.  The normal reaction of a person exposed to the discharge of 

a Taser® is the loss of some voluntary muscle control 
resulting in the subject falling to the ground or ‘freezing’ on 
the spot.  For this reason, there is clearly a possibility of 
some secondary injury to the ‘Tasered’ subject, caused by 
falling and striking a hard surface.  Particular attention 
should therefore be paid to the immediate environment and 
to assessing any additional risk factors (i.e. age, physical 
condition of the subject, objects being held by subject, etc.).  

7.  A Taser® shall not be used in cases of passive resistance, 

unless a lesser means of force: 

a.  Has been attempted and failed; 
b.  Is not an option due to exigent circumstances; or 

 

 

 

 

 

 

656c.  If attempted, could result in a significant possibility of 

injury to the employee or suspect. 

d.  Where feasible, supervisory approval should be obtained 
before a Taser® is used to effect the arrest of a subject 
who is passively resisting.  
 

8.  Any use of the Taser® not consistent with established 

departmental policy or training is expressly prohibited, and 
may result in corrective or disciplinary action. 

9.  Violation of policies or training governing the use of the 
Taser® by an employee may result in remedial training, 
corrective or disciplinary action. 

 

 

11.10.090  Taser® Maintenance 

 

 

A.  Replacement Cartridges: 

 
Upon use of a cartridge, the deploying personnel shall submit a copy 
of the completed Taser® Use Report-MNPD Form 108T detailing the 
use of the Taser® to the Police Training Division. Upon review of the 
supporting documentation, the Training Division will provide 
authorized replacement cartridges. Only cartridges provided by the 
Training Division are authorized for use. 
 

B.  All Tasers shall be downloaded on a quarterly basis by designated 
supervisory personnel at the precinct or unit where Tasers are 
assigned. The download will include both department issued and 
personally owned Tasers. Such download data shall be stored on a 
network based drive, as identified by Police Information Technology 
Division, and shall be maintained at least five (5) years. 

 
C.  Any Taser® which may require service, repair, or maintenance 
shall be delivered to the Police Training Division as soon as 
practical.  The Academy shall, when available, issue a temporary 
replacement Taser® until such assigned Taser® can be returned. 

11.10.100  Reporting & Documentation of Taser® Use 

 

 
A.  Personnel shall report all use of force incidents for the purpose of 

 

determining their justification.  Consistent with established policy, when 
force is applied through the use of the Taser®, the employee shall 
complete the Use of Force Report-MNPD Form 108 and a Taser® Use 
Report-MNPD Form 108T. 
 

B.  As with any application of force, multiple applications/bursts of the 
Taser®, in any mode, is a separate application of force within the 

657overall force incident and justification for each must be clearly 
articulated. 

 
C.  Personnel shall report the display of a Taser® when such display has 
had the effect of reducing or eliminating the need for additional use of 
force. Reporting of such displays shall be by the completion of a 
Taser® Use Report-MNPD Form 108T (if no other force is used, a Use 
of Force Report-MNPD Form 108 is not required).  For purposes of this 
section, display is defined as: drawing and aiming, or indicating 
potential use, without application, of a Taser® in circumstances where 
any person perceives the action as a use of force or threat of a use of 
force, whether or not this is accompanied by a verbal warning, 
sparking of the device or placing of the laser sight red dot onto a 
subject.  Reports generated under this section will be submitted 
through the established chain of command and a copy submitted to the 
Director of the Training Division. 

 
D.  Personnel shall immediately notify a supervisor anytime their Taser® is 
activated except for a spark test or formal training exercise.  Upon the 
deactivation of the safety, the Taser® is activated and will begin 
recording dataport information.  The laser sighting and led lighting will 
also occur.  Should the incident not require a 108 or 108T, it will be 
documented on an MNPD supplement form 104. A supervisor shall 
download the dataport record of this event when appropriate and 
consistent with established training. 

 
E.  The original Taser® Use Report-MNPD Form 108T shall be processed 
with the original Use of Force Report-MNPD Form 108 consistent with 
established policy. When appropriate, the download report may be 
included with the submission packet. 

 
 
 
 
F.  Evidence Collection & Maintenance 
 

1.  Taser® Cartridge(s) and Probes 

 
Expended Taser® Cartridge(s) and Probes may be placed into 
property as evidence or disposed of as bio-hazardous waste 
consistent with established procedure. 
 

2.  Photographs 

 
When appropriate, photographs should be made of a subject’s 
injuries/condition.  
 

G.  The Police Training Division will maintain a database of Taser® 
equipment assigned by the MNPD, as well as personally owned 

658Tasers®, and their use consistent with established policy and 
procedure.  Such database will include, at a minimum, the name of the 
personnel receiving the Taser®, the serial number(s) of assigned 
Taser®, serial number(s) of assigned/expended cartridges, complaint 
numbers of incidents related to expended cartridges, and the relevant 
dates and times relating to issuance of such equipment. 
 

H.  Precinct/Division Commander Review 
 

1.  Whenever the Taser® is displayed or utilized and the MNPD Form 
108T, Taser® Use Report is completed, the Precinct/Division 
Commander shall review that form and all associated documents. 
 

2.  After review, the Precinct/Division Commander shall make a 

determination whether or not to authorize the officer to continue to 
carry/utilize the Taser®. If the employee's Precinct/Division 
Commander is not available to review and approve the MNPD 
Form 108T (on vacation, sick leave, etc.), another Precinct/Division 
Commander in that Bureau will review and approve or disapprove 
the MNPD Form 108T. The MNPD Form 108T cannot be approved 
by an Acting Precinct/Division Commander.  For the purpose of this 
general order, Precinct/Division Commanders are Police Captains 
or Police Commanders.  If the Precinct/Division Commander 
disapproves the employee’s continued use of the Taser®, he/she 
shall complete a detailed narrative supporting his/her decision and 
attach it to the MNPD Form 108T. 

3.  The Precinct/Division Commander shall immediately notify the 

following departmental elements should an employee’s 
authorization to carry the Taser® be suspended: 

a.  The employee’s chain of command; 
b.  The Director of the Training Academy; and 
c.  The Chief of Police 

 

 

 

11.10.110  Use of Less Lethal Devices 

 

 
The department may issue or make available less lethal devices (i.e., 
bean bag, etc.) to authorized employees who have successfully 
completed specialized training and/or qualification in the operation and 
use of these devices. 
 

11.10.120  Use of Deadly Force in Self Defense 

 
Authorized employees may use deadly force when they have a 
reasonable belief that the action is immediately necessary to prevent 
imminent death or serious bodily injury of a human being, including the 
employee. 
 

65911.10.130  Use of Deadly Force to Effect an Arrest 

 
Authorized employees may use deadly force to effect the arrest of a 
fleeing felon only when: 

 

11.10.140  Administration of First-Aid 

A.  The employee has probable cause to believe the individual to be 

arrested has committed a felony involving the infliction or threatened 
infliction of serious bodily injury; AND 
 

B.  The employee has probable cause to believe that the individual to be 
arrested poses a threat of death or serious bodily injury, either to the 
employee or to others unless immediately apprehended; AND 

 
 
C.  Where feasible, the employee has identified himself/herself as a police 

employee and given warning such as, “STOP--POLICE--I'LL 
SHOOT,” that deadly force is about to be used unless flight ceases; 
AND 

 
D.  If all other means of apprehension available to the employee under the 

attendant circumstances have been exhausted. 

 
A.  Whenever an employee is involved in a use of force incident in which a 
person sustains injuries or requests evaluation and/or treatment, the 
appropriate first-aid shall be administered either by the employee or 
others at the scene, by transporting the injured person to the hospital, 
and/or by summoning emergency medical personnel. 
 

 

B.  After any use of force, employees should inquire of the subject as to 

injuries or pre-existing medical conditions, regardless of whether they 
are obvious.  Where employees are informed or have reason to believe 
that a person, to whom any use of force has been applied, has an 
injury or pre-existing medical condition which places the subject at an 
increased risk of developing a medical crisis, employees shall provide 
immediate aid by transporting the injured person to the hospital, and/or 
by summoning emergency medical personnel. 

 
C.  After any use of force on an individual who has exhibited signs or 
symptoms of excited delirium, extreme drug/alcohol intoxication, 
extreme hyperactivity, or similar uncontrolled behaviors, employees 
shall provide immediate aid by summoning emergency medical 
personnel and/or by transporting the person to the hospital. 

 

 

660D.  After any use of force on an individual who is suspected to have 

ingested contraband, evidence, or unknown suspicious substances; 
employees shall provide immediate aid by summoning emergency 
medical personnel and/or by transporting the person to the hospital. 

 
E.  After any use of force, at a minimum, employees shall notify receiving 
DCSO personnel of any known or observed injuries or pre-existing 
medical conditions so that the DCSO Nurse can conduct an informed 
intake interview and assessment. 

 
F.   In a case when chemical spray is used the employee will: 
 

1.  Monitor and verbally reassure the subject that the effects of the 

spray will normally subside in thirty to forty-five minutes; 
 

2.  After the subject is secured, allow the subject proper ventilation to 

expedite the recovery period; 

 

 

 

3.  If the individual experiences or complains of symptoms other than 
those normally associated with the use a chemical spray or does 
not show signs of recovery within the normally expected time 
period, they should be afforded immediate medical attention.  
Unusual symptoms include profuse sweating, respiratory problems, 
or chest and/or neck pain.  If these symptoms do occur the 
employee should administer first aid and call for an ambulance.  
Employees will also advise medical personnel that the individual 
has been exposed to chemical spray;  

4.  The Chemical Spray Aftercare Notice, MNPD Form 109, shall be 

provided to all individuals who have been exposed to the chemical 
spray; and 

5.  When transferring custody of a subject who has been exposed to 
chemical spray to medical personnel, Davidson County Sheriff’s 
Office Personnel, or others, the employee shall advise the receiving 
personnel of the transferred subject’s exposure to the chemical 
spray and the time of the exposure. 

 
G.  When the Taser® is used, either by probes or drive stun, the employee 

will: 
 
1.  Monitor and verbally reassure the subject that the effects of the 

Taser® will normally subside in a matter of minutes, if not 
immediately. 
 

6612.  If the individual experiences or complains of symptoms other than 
those normally associated with the use of the Taser® or does not 
show signs of recovery within the normally expected time period, 
they should be afforded immediate medical attention. Employees 
will advise medical personnel that the individual has been exposed 
to the Taser®, and when custody is transferred, the transferring 
personnel shall also notify the receiving personnel that the subject 
has been exposed to the Taser®. 

3.  After Taser® use, the following persons shall be medically 

evaluated by emergency medical personnel or by an appropriate 
medical facility: 

a.  Persons who are visibly pregnant or are at the extremes of age 

or physically disabled, 
 

b.  Persons who had more than three (3) bursts applied via probes, 

c.  Persons who had more than one CED effectively used in the 

same incident, 

d.  Persons who have been subjected to a continuous burst of 

fifteen (15) seconds or more, or 

e.  Persons described as requiring evaluation and/or treatment as 
described in Sections A or B above or the Guidelines for Probe 
Removal of the MNPD Taser® Student Manual. 

4.  The Taser® Aftercare Notice shall be provided to all individuals 

who have been exposed to the Taser®. 
 

5.  Probe Removal: Probes that have not pierced the skin or are 

superficially in the skin may be removed by an employee who is 
trained to do so and, if practical, in the presence of another 
employee.  Authorized employees shall remove such probes 
consistent with department-approved training and the Guidelines 
for Police Officer Removal of Taser® Probes.  Employees shall 
NOT attempt removal if subject is combative or if the location of the 
probe is in the face, neck, ear, breast, groin, or deeply embedded. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.10.150  General Provisions 

 
A.  In addition to the use of force provisions stated in this order, an 

authorized employee may also discharge a firearm under the following 
circumstances: 
 

6621.  During legal or routine firearms training; and 

 

2.  To destroy seriously injured and suffering or dangerous animals 

when no other disposition is practical. A supervisor's approval will 
be sought when possible. 

 
B.  Authorized employees shall adhere to the following restrictions: 

 
1.  Except for maintenance, official inspections, or during training, 

employees shall not draw or exhibit their firearm unless 
circumstances create reason to believe that it may become 
necessary to use it as provided in this policy; 
 

2.  Warning shots are prohibited; 

3.  When effecting an arrest, no form of deadly force shall be used 
which would pose a substantial risk to innocent bystanders; and 

 

 

4.  When the use of deadly force is necessary to defend the employee 
or another from death or serious bodily harm, every effort will be 
made to minimize the risk of harm to innocent persons. 

 
C.  Employees shall adhere to department approved procedures, training, 

and tactics related to use of force. 
 

D.  Employees shall not discharge their firearm at or from a moving 

vehicle unless absolutely necessary to protect the life of the employee 
or others. 

 
E.  Employees shall not knowingly place themselves in a position where 
they would be in jeopardy of being struck by a suspect vehicle or 
knowingly stand and/or step into the path of a vehicle, creating 
circumstances where the use of deadly force may be necessary. 

 
F.  All authorized employees shall be armed while on duty except, subject 
to supervisory approval, when their assignment requires otherwise. 

 
G.  The carrying of firearms while off-duty shall be at the discretion of the 
employee.  If the employee chooses not to carry a firearm and the 
need for police services arises, the employee shall take appropriate 
action and request an on-duty employee to respond. 

 
H.  A firearm must always be carried by an authorized employee when 
operating a departmental vehicle except, subject to supervisory 
approval, when his/her safety might be jeopardized should his/her 
identity be revealed. 

663 
I.  When an authorized employee is in civilian attire and armed, the 
firearm must be concealed from view when in public.  Authorized 
employees shall always possess their departmental credentials (I.D. 
card and badge) when armed. 

 
J.  Use of equipment, other than the approved baton, as an impact device 

is prohibited. 

1.  However, under exigent circumstances, other equipment may be 
used as a defensive impact device when the use of the baton is not 
feasible.   
 
a.  If such non-lethal equipment is used as a defensive impact 
device within the guidelines of this policy, the guidelines 
applicable to the use of a baton shall apply. 
 

b.  If lethal equipment (firearm, vehicle, etc.) is used as a defensive 
impact device within the guidelines of this policy, the guidelines 
applicable to the use of a deadly force shall apply. 

2.  When such equipment is used as a defensive impact device, the 
member should disengage as soon as the situation permits and 
transition to an approved device. 
 

K.  When an employee reasonably believes that an arrestee has secreted 
an item within his/her mouth believed to be contraband or evidence, 
the following shall apply: 
 
1.  An officer may reasonably order an arrestee to remove that which 

the arrestee has within his/her mouth. 
 

2.  Before an officer may use physical force to search an arrestee's 

mouth for contraband the officer must first have (all of the following 
simultaneously present): 

a.  a lawful arrest of the person based upon probable cause; 

 

b.  probable cause to believe that the arrestee has secreted a 
"seizeable item" (e.g. illegal drugs) within his/her mouth; 

c.  a "clear indication" that a seizeable item will be found within the 

arrestee's mouth; and 

d.  either a warrant authorizing an intrusion into the arrestee's 

mouth, or exigent circumstances, such as: 

 

 

 

 

 

664(1) imminent destruction of evidence or 

 

(2) a medical emergency. 

3.  Once all of the prerequisites listed above have been satisfied, then 

an officer may use objectively reasonable force to extract the 
contraband secreted in the arrestee's mouth in a manner consistent 
with departmentally approved training.  
 

4.  After such incidents, such persons shall be medically evaluated by 
emergency medical personnel or by an appropriate medical facility. 

11.10.160  Use of Force Training 

A.  All employees will be provided with a copy of the current use of force 
policy and thoroughly trained before being authorized to carry any 
weapon.  Authorized employees will be instructed in the policies and 
procedures described in such policy and provided with the necessary 
training, at a minimum, on an annual basis. Employees shall adhere to 
principles and practices provided during departmentally approved 
training.  
(The category of violation is based upon the circumstances and nature 
of the offense).  

B.  Less Lethal Devices 

Only those authorized employees who have successfully completed 
specialized training and/or qualification in the operation and use of less 
lethal devices may use such devices. 

 

  

C.  Lethal Weapons 

For policy regarding training in the use of lethal weapons, see current 
firearms policy and departmentally approved lesson plans. 

D.  Written directives and lesson plans governing the use of force shall be 

reviewed annually by the Director of the Training Division. 

11.10.170  Reporting Use of Force 

A.  Personnel shall report all use of force incidents. However, no MNPD 
Form 108 is required when official presence, verbal direction, and/or 
soft empty-hand control is used by the employee and there is no injury 
and no allegation of injury. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

665 

 

to: 

 

 

B.  Use of force incidents to be reported shall include but are not limited 

1.  Whenever an employee discharges a firearm, other than for 

training, or legal recreational purposes; 

 
2.  Whenever an employee takes an action that results in (or is alleged 

to have resulted in) injury or death of another person; 

3.  When force is applied through the use of less lethal weapons, CE 

devices, chemical spray, baton, etc.; and/or 

 
4.  Whenever an employee uses defensive or physical force other than 

soft empty-hand control. 

 
C.  The employee involved in a use of force incident shall notify the 

appropriate supervisor immediately and complete an MNPD Form 108, 
Use of Force Report.  

D.  The employee’s immediate supervisor shall investigate the incident 
and review the MNPD Form 108, Use of Force Report and any 
associated documents completed by the employee, and document 
his/her findings on an MNPD Form 104, Supplement Report.  

E.  Such supervisory investigation, for Taser® use reports, shall include a 
review of the Precinct/Division conducted Taser® Download Report. 
The specific data from the Taser® download to be listed on the MNPD 
Form 108T after a Taser® incident and included in the Supervisory 
Review are, at a minimum, the Date & Time of the Taser® use, 
Duration, Temperature and Battery information. The page from the 
download report documenting this incident shall be attached to, and 
become a part of, MNPD Form 108T. 

F.  The reviewing supervisor shall ensure a departmental control number 
is assigned to the Use of Force Report immediately upon receipt.   

G.  MNPD Form 108, Use of Force Reports, Taser® download reports, 

and the MNPD Form 104 Supplement Report containing the 
supervisor’s findings, shall be processed through the appropriate chain 
of command up to the Office of the Chief of Police and copies 
forwarded to the Director of the Training Division. 

H.  Upon receipt, the support staff in the Office of the Chief of Police shall 
file the original and make any copies deemed necessary.  All use of 
force incidents shall be logged into a computer database. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

666 

 

 

 

 

I.  The notified supervisor shall ensure that all appropriate notifications 
are made, consistent with established policy and procedure on call-
outs of investigative elements. 

J.  Responsibilities of the Office of Chief of Police 

 
The Office of the Chief of Police will receive and file all original MNPD 
Form 108, Use of Force Reports, MNPD Form 108T, Taser® Use 
Reports, Taser® Download Reports, and related reports.  Such reports 
shall be copied and distributed as directed.  Relevant data from such 
reports will also be entered into a computer database. 

 

K.  Administrative and Investigative Procedures 

1.  Any employee whose use of force results in a death or serious 

bodily injury shall be removed from line or field duty assignments 
consistent with those outlined in Chapter 4, Section 4.60 (Relief 
From Duty/Decommission and Alternate Duty Assignment) by 
his/her supervisor without loss of pay or benefits, pending the 
investigative review. 
 

2.  As soon as practical, the employee’s supervisor shall schedule a 

meeting between the involved employee and a representative from 
the Police Advocacy/Support Services Section for debriefing. 

3.  When an employee discharges a firearm in a manner that 

constitutes deadly force, the employee will be required to submit 
that firearm for examination or testing by the appropriate firearms 
examination laboratory as may be necessary for the investigation. 
The firearm will not be left at the laboratory and never out of the 
employee’s possession.  The results of any examination will be 
submitted directly to the investigator. 

4.  The employee-in-charge of the investigation will document the 

firearm used by recording the make, model, and serial number of 
that firearm in his/her report.  The firearm will be retained by the 
employee involved, but will not be cleaned prior to the examination. 

11.10.180  Force Review Board 

 

A.  The Force Review Board examines whether policies and procedures 
governing the use of force have been followed.  The Chief of Police 
has the discretion of convening a Force Review Board as a result of 
any departmental use of force incident. The Chief of Police shall be the 
final authority within the department as to the disposition of each 
incident reviewed by the board. 

667 

B.  A Force Review Board shall be convened to review: 
 

1.  All uses of force involving firearms discharges. 
 

NOTE:   Firearms discharges at injured or suffering 
animals or those involving accidental or negligent 
discharges are addressed in Section C, below. 
 

2.  All uses of force involving the use of deadly force, or any force 

which results in death or serious bodily injury. 
 

3.  Uses of less than lethal force when such force is applied through 

the use of a primer activated weapon. 

4.  Any incident referred to the board by the Chief of Police, a Bureau 

Deputy Chief, the Director of the Training Division, or the Director of 
the Office of Professional Accountability. 

 

C.  Weapons Discharges at Injured or Suffering Animals & 

Negligent/Accidental Firearms Discharges 
 
1.  All firearm discharges resulting in the death of an injured and 

suffering animal, when no other disposition is practical, shall be 
investigated and reviewed by the affected employee’s chain of 
command.  
 

2.  All firearm discharges as the result of negligence or an accident, 

unless occurring during an application of some type of force, shall 
be investigated and reviewed by the affected employee’s chain of 
command. 

 

 

3.  The involved employee’s component commanding employee will 

review the circumstances and make a conclusion as to whether the 
weapon discharge was within departmental policy.  The component 
commander will then forward a written report to the Chief of Police, 
through his/her chain of command, detailing his/her conclusion.  If 
the component commander reasonably believes that the 
employee’s actions may have been outside the parameters of the 
department’s policies, procedures, or directives, a recommendation 
regarding remedial training and/or corrective/disciplinary action 
shall be included. 

4.  Discharges under this section will only be presented to the Force 

Review Board when the employee’s chain of command determines 
such review to be in the best interest of the department.  
  

668D.  Firearm discharges involving an application of force, including 

dangerous animals for employee safety, or any use of deadly force will 
be investigated by the Homicide Section or Precinct Investigative 
Units, consistent with their established operating procedures, and 
presented to the Force Review Board. 
 

E.  Force Review Board Membership 
 

  The Force Review Board shall consist of: 

 

1.  The Deputy Chiefs of Police, or a designee approved by the Chief 
of Police. The Deputy Chief of the involved employee shall be the 
chairperson; 

2.  The Director of the Training Division; 
3.  The Commander of the Homicide Section; 
4.  The component commander of the involved employee, as 

designated by the board chairperson; 

5.  An equivalent rank/classification of the involved personnel, 

selected by the Chairperson; 

6.  A representative of the Office of Professional Accountability, who is 
assigned to assist the board and is a non-voting member; and 
7.  An attorney from the Metropolitan Department of Law, who will be 

present as a non-voting member.      

 
F.  Meetings and Findings 

 

1.  The chairperson of the Force Review Board should schedule a 
meeting of the Force Review Board to occur within thirty (30) 
calendar days, but no more than sixty (60) calendar days after each 
use of force required to be reviewed under this policy. 
 

2.  If facts indicate that criminal charges may be filed against an 

employee as a result of a use of force, the Force Review Board 
shall delay final recommendations until after such court actions are 
concluded. 

 

3.  At least five (5) working days prior to each Force Review Board 
meeting, the chairperson of the Force Review Board will ensure 
that all appropriate investigative reports are delivered to 
participating board members.  Board members shall be advised 
that the investigative reports are not to be reviewed by anyone 
other than board members, and all reports must be returned at the 
conclusion of the board review. 
 

4.  Findings of the Force Review Board: 

 

669The Force Review Board, as a result of its review process, shall 
report three findings at the conclusion of each hearing.  The board 
shall make the following findings: 

 

 

a.   In Policy or Out of Policy 

 
The board shall make a finding as to whether the use of force 
was consistent with established departmental policy or 
procedure. The finding shall be reported as follows: 

 
(1) In Policy: The application of force was consistent with 
established departmental policy or procedure, or 
 

(2) Out of Policy: The application of force violated established 

departmental policy or procedure.  The board, in its findings, 
shall specify which policy or procedure was violated. 

 

b. Intentional, Negligent, or Accidental  

The board shall make a finding as to whether the use of force 
was intentional, negligent, or accidental.  

 
c. Associated Recommendations 

The board shall make such recommendations it deems 
necessary, to include but not limited to: 
 
(1) the need for remedial training; 
(2) the need to review or revise departmental policy, procedure, 

or training; 

(3) the need for corrective or disciplinary action; or 
(4) any other recommendation the board deems relevant. 

5.  A report of findings shall be submitted to the Chief of Police.  This 

 

report should also include: 
 
a.  The relevant facts and circumstances surrounding the incident; 
b.  A conclusion as to whether the use of force complies with 

departmental policies and procedures; and 

c.  Any other documentation as needed. 

6.  When the board has reviewed the circumstances of the use of force 
and formulated their conclusions, the chairperson will cause the 
preparation of a report for the Chief of Police, detailing the board’s 
conclusions and any recommendations. This report will be 
forwarded to the Chief of Police within fifteen (15) working days 
after the conclusion of the Force Review Board hearing. Should the 
voting members fail to unanimously agree regarding the board’s 

 

 

670conclusions and recommendations, each dissenting opinion shall 
be fully reported. 

 

Within fifteen (15) working days after the Force Review Board 
issues its report to the Chief of Police, the representative from the 
Office of Professional Accountability may forward a separate 
opinion regarding the conclusions and recommendations of the 
Force Review Board to the Chief of Police. 
 

7.  The chairperson will retain all records, notes, and reports 

associated with the board hearing. 

G.  Responsibilities 

1.  The Chief of Police shall be the final authority within the department 
as to the disposition of each incident.  The Chief of Police shall 
review all relevant reports and take one of the following actions: 

a.  Adopt the findings of the Force Review Board as stated in its 

report; or 
 

b.  Modify the findings of the Force Review Board and, if 

appropriate, issue an addendum to the report indicating the 
manner in which the findings have been modified; or 

c.  Request the Force Review Board reconvene for the purpose of 
making additional findings and reporting them to the Chief of 
Police. In such an event, the Chief of Police shall instruct the 
board in writing as to what additional findings are needed. 

2.  The Chief of Police shall, upon a determination that a use of force 

incident was out-of-policy, refer the matter to the Office of 
Professional Accountability or the employee’s chain of command 
for processing in accordance with the department’s corrective or 
disciplinary action procedures.  

3.  Should the Chief of Police find that a need for additional or remedial 
training exists, either for the affected employee or throughout the 
department, the Director of the Training Division shall be 
responsible for providing the appropriate additional and/or remedial 
training and maintain a record of such training as a part of the 
departmental training records. 

4.  It will be the responsibility of the involved employee’s component 

commander to have: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

671a.  MNPD Form 343, Remedial Training Request, completed and 

forwarded to the Director of the Training Division; 
 

b.  Ensure the employee successfully completes any 

recommended remedial training; and 

c.  Forward documentation of the employee’s successful 

completion of the recommended remedial training to the Office 
of the Chief of Police for inclusion in the employee’s Force 
Review Board file. 

5.  The Office of the Chief of Police shall maintain a file for all cases 

reviewed by the Force Review Board. 

6.  The Office of the Chief of Police shall cause the Director of the 
Training Division to be notified of the final results and approved 
dispositions of all force incidents reviewed by the Board.  The 
Director shall review all incidents to identify training issues or 
needs. 

7.  If the Chief of Police makes a recommendation calling for action by a 
component of the department, that component’s Deputy Chief shall 
be responsible to ensure that the proper follow-up action is taken. 
That Deputy Chief shall provide a report to the Chief of Police 
detailing what action was taken. 

8.  The Chief of Police has the ultimate responsibility for reviewing use 

of force incidents. 
 

H.  The Chief of Police will schedule a Departmental Force Review Board 
annually. The core members shall review each use of deadly force and 
all cases reviewed by the Force Review Board for the purpose of 
identifying any potential patterns and/or systemic problems and to 
report their findings and recommendations to the Chief of Police. 

 

 

1.  Core members of the annual Departmental Force Review Board 

shall include the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chiefs, the Director of 
the Training Division, the commanding employee of the Homicide 
Section, and a representative from the Office of Professional 
Accountability.  Other persons may be present at the discretion of 
the Chief of Police. 

2.  The Strategic Development Division will annually provide the Chief 
of Police and members of the Departmental Force Review Board 
with a use of force analysis to assist in identifying any potential 

 

 

 

 

 

672patterns and/or systemic problems in regard to the department’s 
use of force incidents.   

 

 

673