Policy

300

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

300.1
The purpose of this policy it to provide guidelines on the reasonable use of force. While
there is no way to specify the exact amount or type of reasonable force to be applied in any
situation, every member of this department is expected to use these guidelines to make
such decisions in a professional, impartial and reasonable manner.

300.1.1
Definitions related to this policy include:

DEFINITIONS

Active resistance - A subject attempts to attack or does attack an officer; exhibits
aggressive behavior (e.g., lunging toward the officer, striking the officer with hands, fists,
kicks or any instrument that may be perceived as a weapon such as knife or stick); or
exhibits defensive resistance (e.g., attempts to leave the scene, flee, hide from detection,
or pull away from the officer's grasp). Verbal statements, bracing or tensing alone do not
constitute active resistance.

Anatomical Compliance Technique - The act of applying pressure to vulnerable areas,
weak points or pressure points of the body. This technique is used to cause the immediate
response by a subject who poses a threat.

Apprehension - The arrest, capture or taking into custody of a person.

Arrest - The taking of one person into custody by another. To constitute arrest there must
be an actual restraint of the person. The restraint may be imposed by force or may result
from the submission of the person arrested to the custody of the one arresting him. An
arrest is a restraint of greater scope or duration than an investigatory stop or detention. An
arrest is lawful when supported by probable cause.

Canine apprehension - Any event involving canine deployment wherein the canine has a
clear and well-documented role in the capture of a person. The mere presence of a canine
at the scene of an arrest shall not count as a canine apprehension.

Canine deployment - Any situation, except one involving an on-leash article search only,
in which a canine is brought to the scene and used in an attempt to locate or apprehend a
suspect, whether or not a suspect actually is located or apprehended.

Critical firearm discharge - A discharge of a firearm by an NOPD officer, including
discharges where no person or animal is struck. Range and training firings, destruction of
animals, and off-duty hunting discharges where no person is struck are not critical firearms
discharges.

Deadly force - Force reasonably anticipated and intended to create a substantial likelihood
of causing death or very serious injury.

Electronic Control Weapon (E.C.W.) - A weapon designed primarily to discharge electrical
charges into a subject that will cause involuntary muscle contractions and overrides the
subject's voluntary motor responses

Use of Force - 90

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

E.C.W. application - The contact and delivery of electrical impulse to a subject with an
E.C.W.

Force statement - A written statement documenting a use of force which shall include the
following:

A detailed account of the incident from the officer's perspective

The reason for the initial police presence

A specific description of the acts that led to the use of force

The level of resistance encountered

A description of every type of force used

Force Investigation Team (FIT) - The NOPD unit tasked with conducting investigations of
serious uses of force; uses of force indicating apparent criminal conduct by an officer; uses
of force by NOPD personnel of a rank higher than sergeant; and uses of force reassigned to
FIT by the Superintendent, the Superintendent's designee, or PIB. Fit shall also investigate
all instances where an individual has died while in, or as an apparent result of being in the
custody of NOPD.

In-custody death - An incident where an individual died while in, or as an apparent result
of being in, the custody of NOPD.

Lethal force - The use of force likely to cause death or serious physical injury, (e.g., the
use of a firearm, neck hold or strike to the head, neck or throat with a hard object).

Neck hold - Any of the following types of holds:

Arm-bar control hold, a hold that inhibits breathing by compression of the airway in
the neck

Carotid restraint hold, a hold that inhibits blood flow by compression of the blood
vessels in the neck

Lateral vascular neck constraint

A hold with a knee or other object to the back of a prone subject's neck.

A neck hold shall be considered lethal force.

Passive resistance - Behavior that is unresponsive to police verbal communication or
direction (e.g., ignoring or disregarding police attempts at verbal communication or control;
going limp; or failing to physically respond or move) and verbal resistance (e.g., verbally
rejecting police verbal communication or direction; telling the officer that he or she will not
comply with police direction, to leave alone, or not bother him or her). Bracing, tensing,
linking arms, or verbally signaling an intention to avoid or prevent being taken into custody
constitutes passive resistance.

Public Integrity Bureau (PIB) - The NOPD unit charged with conducting internal and
administrative investigations of NOPD officers and employees.

Reasonable force - Force that is objectively reasonable under the circumstances and the
minimum amount of force necessary to effect an arrest or protect the officer or other person.

Reportable use of force - Any force above hand control or escort techniques applied
for the purposes of handcuffing, or escort techniques that are not used as pressure point

Use of Force - 91

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

compliance techniques, do not result in injury or complaint of injury and are not used to
overcome resistance.

Serious physical injury - Physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; causes
death or serious and protracted disfigurement; or causes impairment of the function of any
bodily organ or limb.

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Serious use of force - Includes the following:

All uses of lethal force by an NOPD officer

All critical firearm discharges by an NOPD officer

All uses of force by an NOPD officer resulting in serious physical injury or requiring
hospitalization

All neck holds

All canine bites

All uses of force by an NOPD officer resulting in a loss of consciousness

More than two applications of an E.C.W. on an individual during a single interaction,
regardless of the mode or duration of the application, and whether the applications
are by the same or different officers, or E.C.W. application for longer than 15 seconds,
whether continuous or consecutive

Any strike, blow, kick, E.C.W. application or similar use of force against a handcuffed
subject

Supervisor - A sworn NOPD employee at the rank of sergeant or above (or anyone acting
in those capacities) and non-sworn NOPD personnel with oversight responsibility for other
officers.

Use of force - Physical effort to compel compliance by an unwilling subject above
un-resisted handcuffing, including pointing a firearm at a person.

Use of force indicating apparent criminal conduct by an officer - Force that a
reasonable and trained supervisor would conclude could result in criminal charges due
to the apparent circumstances of the use of force, such as the level of the force used
as compared to the resistance encountered, or discrepancies in the use of force as
described by the officer and the use of force as evidenced by any resulting injuries, witness
statements, or other evidence.

Use of force report - A written report documenting a supervisor's investigation of a use of
force.

Use of force statement - Officer's written report documenting his/her use of force.

POLICY

300.2
The use of force by law enforcement personnel is a matter of critical concern, both to
the public and to the law enforcement community. Officers are involved on a daily basis
in numerous and varied interactions and, when warranted, may use reasonable force in
carrying out their duties.

Officers must have an understanding of, and true appreciation for, their authority and
limitations. This is especially true with respect to overcoming resistance while engaged in
the performance of law enforcement duties.

Use of Force - 92

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

The Department recognizes and respects the value of all human life and dignity without
prejudice to anyone. Vesting officers with the authority to use reasonable force and to
protect the public welfare requires monitoring, evaluation and a careful balancing of all
interests.

Officers must meet training, and certification requirements to be permitted to carry and use
authorized weapons.

Officers shall not use or possess Oleoresin capsicum spray while on-duty, including officers
working secondary employment.

As part of the documentation of its activities, the SWAT team shall produce Use of Force
reports.

DUTY TO INTERCEDE AND REPORT

300.3
Any officer present and observing another officer using force that is clearly beyond that
which is objectively reasonable under the circumstances shall, when in a position to
do so, intercede to prevent the use of unreasonable force. An officer who observes
another employee use any use of force incident shall promptly report these observations
to a supervisor, and officers observing a level 2, 3 or 4 use of force shall write a Force
Statement before the end of shift, which shall be included in the Use of Force Report.

300.4 USE OF FORCE
Officers shall use only that amount of force that reasonably appears necessary given the
facts and circumstances perceived by the officer at the time of the event to accomplish a
legitimate law enforcement purpose.

The "reasonableness" of force will be judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on
the scene at the time of the incident. Any evaluation of reasonableness must allow for the
fact that officers are often forced to make split-second decisions about the amount of force
that is necessary in a particular situation, with limited information and in circumstances that
are tense, uncertain and rapidly evolving.

Given that no policy can realistically predict every possible situation an officer might
encounter, officers are entrusted to use well-reasoned discretion in determining the
appropriate use of force in each incident.

It is also recognized that circumstances may arise in which officers reasonably believe that
it would be impractical or ineffective to use any of the tools, weapons or methods provided
by the Department. Officers may find it more effective or reasonable to improvise their
response to rapidly unfolding conditions that they are confronting. In such circumstances,
the use of any improvised device or method must nonetheless be reasonable and utilized
only to the degree reasonably necessary to accomplish a legitimate law enforcement
purpose.

While the ultimate objective of every law enforcement encounter is to avoid or minimize
injury, nothing in this policy requires an officer to retreat or be exposed to possible physical
injury before applying reasonable force.

USE OF FORCE TO EFFECT AN ARREST

300.4.1
An officer making a lawful arrest may use reasonable force to effect the arrest and detention,
and to overcome any resistance or threatened resistance of the person being arrested or
detained (C. Cr. P. 220).

Use of Force - 93

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

FACTORS USED TO DETERMINE THE REASONABLENESS OF FORCE

300.4.2
When determining whether to use force and evaluating whether an officer has used
reasonable force, a number of factors should be taken into consideration, as time and
circumstances permit. These factors include, but are not limited to:

(a) Whether the subject poses a threat to himself, offices or others and the immediacy

and severity of the threat.

(b)

The conduct of the individual being confronted as reasonably perceived by the officer
at the time.

(c) Officer/subject factors (age, size, relative strength, skill level, injuries sustained, level

of exhaustion or fatigue, the number of officers versus subjects).

(d)

The effects of drugs or alcohol.

(e) Subject's mental state or capacity.

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

Proximity of weapons or dangerous improvised devices.

The degree to which the subject has been effectively restrained and his/her ability to
resist despite being restrained.

The availability of other options and their possible effectiveness.

Seriousness of the suspected offense or reason for contact with the individual.

Training and experience of the officer.

Potential for injury to the subject, officers, suspects and others.

(l) Whether the person appears to be resisting, attempting to evade arrest by flight or is

attacking the officer.

(m) The risk of escape.

(n)

The apparent need for immediate control of the subject or a prompt resolution of the
situation.

(o) Whether the conduct of the individual being confronted no longer reasonably appears

to pose an imminent threat to the officer or others.

(p) Any other exigent circumstances.

ANATOMICAL COMPLIANCE TECHNIQUES

300.4.3
Anatomical compliance techniques may be effective in controlling a physically or actively
resisting individual. Officers may only apply those anatomical compliance techniques for
which they have successfully completed department-approved training.

Officers utilizing any anatomical compliance technique should consider:

(a)

The degree to which the application of the technique may be controlled given the level
of resistance.

(b) Whether the person can comply with the direction or orders of the officer.

(c) Whether the person has been given sufficient opportunity to comply.

The application of any anatomical compliance technique shall be discontinued once the
officer determines that compliance has been achieved.

DEADLY FORCE APPLICATIONS

300.5
An officer may use deadly force to protect him/herself or others from what he/she reasonably
believes would be an imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury.

Use of Force - 94

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

SHOOTING AT OR FROM MOVING VEHICLES

300.5.1
Shots fired at or from a moving vehicle are rarely effective. Officers shall not discharge a
firearm from a moving vehicle or at a moving vehicle unless the occupants of the vehicle are
using deadly force, other than the vehicle itself, against the officer or another person, and
such action is necessary for self defense or to protect the other person; shall not intentionally
place themselves in the path of, or reach inside, a moving vehicle; and, where possible,
shall attempt to move out of the path of a moving vehicle before discharging their weapon.
Officers should not shoot at any part of a vehicle in an attempt to disable the vehicle.

300.6

ADDITIONAL USE OF FORCE CONSIDERATIONS

300.6.1 WARNING AND OTHER SHOTS
Warning shots or shots fired for the purpose of summoning aid are prohibited.

DANGEROUS ANIMALS

300.6.2
Officers are authorized to use firearms to stop an animal in circumstances where the animal
reasonably appears to pose an imminent threat to human safety and alternative methods
are not reasonably available or would likely be ineffective.

In circumstances in which officers have sufficient advance notice that a potentially
dangerous animal may be encountered, officers should develop reasonable contingency
plans for dealing with the animal (e.g., fire extinguisher, TASER device, animal control
officer). Nothing in this policy shall prohibit any officer from shooting a dangerous animal
if circumstances reasonably dictate that a contingency plan has failed or becomes
impractical.

REPORTING THE USE OF FORCE

300.7
Any use of force by a member of this department shall be documented promptly, completely
and accurately in an appropriate report, depending on the nature of the incident. The
officer should articulate the factors perceived and why he/she believed the use of force
was reasonable under the circumstances. To collect data for purposes of training, resource
allocation, analysis and related purposes, the Department may require the completion of
additional report forms, as specified in department policy, procedure or law.

Use of force reports, including force statements, shall be maintained centrally by PIB.

REPORT OF FIREARM DISCHARGE

300.7.1
Except during training or recreational use, any member who discharges a firearm
intentionally or unintentionally, on- or off-duty, shall notify the dispatcher and his/her
supervisor immediately or as soon as circumstances permit.
If the discharge is a level-4
use of force, the Force Investigation Team shall be notified via the Command Desk and
additional officer statements and reports shall be made in accordance with the Force
Investigation Team/Officer-Involved Shooting Policy.

NOTIFICATION TO SUPERVISORS

300.7.2
Officers who use or observe force shall notify their supervisors immediately following any
use of force incident or upon receipt of an allegation of unreasonable or unreported use of
force by any officer. Officers who use or observe force and fail to report it shall be subject
to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

Use of Force - 95

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

300.8 MEDICAL ATTENTION
Medical assistance shall be obtained for any person who exhibits signs of physical distress,
who has sustained visible injury, expresses a complaint of injury or continuing pain, or who
was rendered unconscious. Any individual exhibiting signs of physical distress after an
encounter should be continuously monitored until he/she can be medically assessed.

Based upon the officer's initial assessment of the nature and extent of the subject's injuries,
medical assistance may consist of examination by emergency medical personnel.
If any
such individual refuses medical attention, such a refusal should be fully documented by
medical personnel and attached to related reports. If a recording is made of the contact or
an interview with the individual, any refusal should be included in the recording, if possible.

Officers shall ensure any person providing medical care or receiving custody of a person
following any use of force is informed that the person was subjected to force. This
notification shall
include a description of the force and any other circumstances the
officer reasonably believes would be potential safety or medical risks to the subject (e.g.,
prolonged struggle, extreme agitation, impaired respiration).

Persons who exhibit extreme agitation, violent irrational behavior accompanied by profuse
sweating, extraordinary strength beyond their physical characteristics and imperviousness
to pain (sometimes called  excited delirium ), or who require a protracted physical encounter
with multiple officers to be brought under control, may be at an increased risk of sudden
death. Calls involving these persons should be considered medical emergencies. Officers
who reasonably suspect a medical emergency should request medical assistance as soon
as practicable and have medical personnel stage away if appropriate.

SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES

300.9
A supervisor shall respond to an incident in which there has been a reported application of
force. The supervisor shall:

(a) Obtain the basic facts from the involved officer. Absent an allegation of misconduct
or excessive force, this will be considered a routine contact in the normal course of
duties.

(b) Ensure that any injured parties are examined and treated.

(c) When possible, separately obtain a recorded interview with the subject upon whom
force was applied. If this interview is conducted without the person having voluntarily
waived his/her Miranda rights, the following shall apply:

1.

2.

3.

The content of the interview should not be summarized or included in any related
criminal charges.

The fact that a recorded interview was conducted should be documented in a
property or other report.

The recording of the interview should be distinctly marked for retention until all
potential for civil litigation has expired.

(d) Once any initial medical assessment has been completed or first aid has been
rendered, ensure that photographs have been taken of any areas involving visible
injury or complaint of pain, as well as overall photographs of uninjured areas. These
photographs should also be retained until all potential civil litigation has expired.

Identify and interview any witnesses not already included in related reports.

(e)

(f)

Review and approve all related reports.

Use of Force - 96

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Policy Manual

Use of Force

(g) Evaluate the circumstances surrounding the incident and initiate an administrative
investigation if there is a question of policy non-compliance or if for any reason further
investigation may be appropriate.

Supervisors shall be responsible for notifying Command Desk of all use of force occurrences
as soon as possible.

PLATOON COMMANDER RESPONSIBILITY

300.9.1
The Platoon Commander shall review each use of force by any personnel within his/her
command and forward the review as appropriate.

300.10 GENERAL
Annually, the NOPD will analyze the year's use of force data and document its findings in
a public report which includes:

(a)

Force related outcome data

(b) Determination of significant trends

(c)

Identification of deficiencies

(d) Recommendations to correct deficiencies

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

Use of Force - 97

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

PR300

Use of Force

PR300.1 USE OF FORCE PRINCIPLES
Use of force by NOPD officers, regardless of the type of force or weapon used, shall abide
by the following requirements:

(a) Officers shall use advisements, warnings, and verbal persuasion, when possible,

before resorting to force.

(b)

Force shall be de-escalated immediately as resistance decreases.

(c) When feasible based on the circumstances, officers will use disengagement; area
containment; surveillance; waiting out a subject; summoning reinforcements; and/or
calling in specialized units, in order to reduce the need for force and increase officer
and civilian safety.

(d) Officers shall allow individuals time to submit to arrest before force is used wherever

possible.

(e) Officers shall not use neck holds, except where lethal force is authorized.

(f)

Officers shall not use head strikes with a hard object, except where lethal force is
authorized.

(g) Officers shall not use force against persons in handcuffs, except as objectively
reasonable to prevent imminent bodily harm to the officer or another person or
persons, or as objectively reasonable, where physical removal
is necessary to
overcome passive resistance.

(h) Officers shall not use force above un-resisted handcuffing to overcome passive
resistance, except that physical removal is permitted as necessary and objectively
reasonable.

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

Un-holstering a firearm and pointing it at a person constitutes a use of force, and
shall accordingly be done only as objectively reasonable to accomplish a lawful police
objective.

Officers shall not use force to attempt to effect compliance with a command that is
unlawful. Any use of force by an officer to subdue an individual resisting arrest or
detention is unreasonable when the initial arrest or detention of the individual was
unlawful.

Immediately following a use of force, officers and upon arrival, a supervisor shall
inspect and observe subjects for injury or complaints of pain resulting from the use
of force, and immediately obtain any necessary medical care. This may require an
officer to provide emergency first aid until professional medical care providers are on
the scene.

Officers shall not draw or exhibit a firearm unless the circumstances surrounding the
incident create a reasonable belief that a situation may escalate to the point where
lethal force would be authorized.

PR300.2 GENERAL INFORMATION
The decision to resort to force to accomplish a lawful police objective must be reasonable.
Officers shall use advisements, warnings, and verbal persuasion, when possible, before
resorting to force.

Use of Force - 29

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

The degree of force used must be reasonable, and necessary, and in a manner that avoids
unnecessary injury to officers and civilians. The officer may only use enough force to
overcome the amount of resistance or aggression met. When such resistance or aggression
is reduced, the officer must correspondingly and immediately reduce the degree of force
he/she is applying, or the use of force is NOT legal.

force will subject officers to discipline, possible criminal
The unreasonable use of
prosecution, and/or civil liability. Officers who use or observe force and fail to report it shall
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.

There are a number of non-lethal skills and equipment which are authorized for use when
necessary to accomplish valid police objectives.

(a) Verbal communication and/or persuasion are a basic defensive tactic.

(b) Bodily force, including hands, fists, and feet may be used in a variety of situations
depending upon the individual officer's skill, and the circumstances. If injuries result
from the use of bodily force, the arresting officer shall handle the injured subject in
accordance with current departmental regulations and the supervisor shall submit a
Resisting Arrest Report along with an incident report through the chain of command.

(c)

The baton is an intermediate level of force. The side handle baton or expandable
baton is capable of causing serious injury. The officer must complete Departmental
training before using the side handle baton or expandable baton. If injuries result from
the use of the baton, the arresting officer shall handle the injured subject in accordance
with current department regulations and the supervisor shall submit a Resisting Arrest
Report along with an incident report through the chain of command.

In all instances where physical force is used to control an individual and the individual is
injured or complains of injury, the supervisor shall complete a use of force report covering
the circumstances surrounding the incident. A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the
Public Integrity Bureau within twenty-four (24) hours of its approval by a supervisor.

Unnecessarily or prematurely drawing or exhibiting a firearm constitutes a use of force and
it limits an officer's alternative's in controlling a situation, creates unnecessary anxiety on
the part of the citizens, and may result in an unwarranted or accidental discharge of the
firearm. Officers shall not draw or exhibit a firearm unless the circumstances surrounding
the incident create a reasonable belief that it may be necessary to use the firearm.

An officer shall exercise extreme caution with respect to use of deadly force. In all cases,
only the minimum degree of force which is necessary shall be used, and every other
available alternative shall, if feasible, shall be exhausted before deadly force is applied if
feasible.

INSTRUCTIONS - GENERAL

PR300.3
Officers who use or observe force shall notify their supervisors immediately following any
use of force incident or upon receipt of an allegation of unreasonable or unreported use of
force by any officer. Officers who use or observe force and fail to report it shall be subject
to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.

Personnel may delay compliance with the provisions of this policy/procedure if the scene
is unstable, there is community unrest, or other conditions make immediate compliance
impracticable. The protection of Department personnel, the public, and the maintenance of
public safety shall remain the priority. The approving supervisor shall ensure the reason for

Use of Force - 30

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

the delay is documented in the Use of Force Report. Such compliance delays are subject
to review by the Use of Force Review Board.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS - SUPERVISOR

PR300.3.1
When notified of a Level 3, or 2 use of force, the supervisor shall respond to the scene and
conduct the appropriate force investigation.

When notified of an allegation of a use of force and the member denies using force, the
supervisor shall respond to the scene and conduct a preliminary investigation into the use
of force allegation.

Supervisors shall be held accountable for the timely, accurate, and thorough documentation
of all use of force incidents.

Supervisors shall
make recommendations for corrective action when appropriate, and document
recommendations in the Use of Force Report.

identify Departmental or individual

training and tactical

issues and
the

Supervisors shall ensure the provisions of all policies are properly applied.

PR300.3.2
USE OF FORCE INVESTIGATION - WHEN NOT NEEDED
A use of force investigation need not be conducted when a subject has incurred an injury
requiring no more than basic first-aid and the injury did not occur as a result of a member's
use of force and there is no allegation of force by the subject.

USE OF FORCE - MISCONDUCT

PR300.3.3
If any force investigation indicates administrative misconduct, the supervisor shall conduct,
at a minimum, a Level 3 force investigation and additionally initiate an internal investigation.
Document the date PIB was notified in the Use of Force Report.

If any force investigation indicates criminal misconduct, the supervisor shall suspend the
investigation immediately and notify PIB. The FIT will take over the investigation.

USE OF FORCE - MEDICAL

PR300.3.4
Personnel shall request medical service without delay when a subject has visible injuries or
the subject complains of injury.

USE OF FORCE - REPORTS

PR300.3.5
Reports shall not contain "boilerplate" or "pat" language (e.g., "furtive movement" or "fighting
stance," etc.) without descriptive or explanatory details of the action."

In the event multiple members are involved in a single incident, regardless of the varying
levels of force used by an individual officer involved, the reporting member or supervisor
shall prepare only one Use of Force Report listing all involved personnel. When multiple
levels of force are used, the highest level of investigation shall be conducted.

PR300.3.6
Injured or killed animals shall be handled and/or disposed of appropriately.

ANIMALS

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

Use of Force - 31

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

LEVELS OF FORCE

PR300.4
Force options are grouped in the following four (4) force levels for reporting and investigating
purposes only:

LEVEL 1

PR300.4.1
Level-1 uses of force include pointing a firearm at a person and hand control or escort
techniques (e.g., elbow grip, wrist grip, or shoulder grip) applied as pressure point
compliance techniques or that result in injury or complaint of injury.

Note: Hand control or escort techniques applied for the purposes of handcuffing or escorts
that are not used as pressure point compliance techniques, do not result in injury or
complaint of injury, and are not used to overcome resistance, are not reportable uses of
force.

- uses of force include use of an ECW (including where an ECW is fired at a person but
misses); use of an impact weapon to strike a person but where no contact is made; use of
a baton for non-striking purposes (e.g., prying limbs, moving or controlling a person); and
weaponless defense techniques (e.g., elbow strikes, kicks, leg sweeps, and takedowns).

PR300.4.2
Level-2

LEVEL 2

PR300.4.3
Level-3

LEVEL 3

- uses of force include any strike to the head (except for a strike with an impact weapon);
use of impact weapons where contact is made (except to the head), regardless of injury; or
the destruction of an animal.

LEVEL 4

PR300.4.4
Level-4 - uses of force include all serious uses of force, and shall be investigated by NOPD's
Force Investigation Team.

Serious use of force:

all uses of lethal force by an NOPD officer;

all critical firearm discharges by an NOPD officer;

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

all neck holds;

all canine bites;

all uses of force by an NOPD officer resulting in serious physical injury or requiring
hospitalization;

all uses of force by an NOPD officer resulting in a loss of consciousness;

(g) more than two applications of an ECW on an individual during a single interaction,
regardless of the mode or duration of the application, and whether the applications
are by the same or different officers, or ECW application for longer than 15 seconds,
whether continuous or consecutive; and

(h)

any strike, blow, kick, ECW application, or similar use of force against a handcuffed
subject.

Use of Force - 32

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

All level-4 uses of force (serious use of force), uses of force indicating apparent criminal
conduct by an officer, uses of force by NOPD personnel of a rank higher than sergeant, or
uses of force reassigned to the FIT by the Superintendent or his designee or PIB shall be
investigated by the FIT. Supervisors shall notify the FIT via the Command Desk.

PR300.5
LEVEL 1 USE OF FORCE INCIDENTS
Level 1 Use of Force incidents are self-reported incidents.

PR300.5.1
Department personnel who use a Level 1 use of force shall:

RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONNEL - LEVEL 1

(a) Notify and brief their supervisor immediately or as soon as practical. If the immediate

supervisor is unavailable, another field supervisor shall be notified.

(b) Complete a Use of Force Report.

(c)

The member who uses force shall write a Force Statement before the end of shift,
which shall be included in the Use of Force Report. The Force Statement shall include:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

A detailed account of the incident from the officer's perspective;

The reason for the initial police presence

A specific description of the acts that led to the use of force;

The level of resistance encountered

A description of every type of force used.

(d) Complete the original Use of Force Report and,

the appropriate
Offense Report and ancillary documents to provide his/her immediate supervisor or,
if unavailable, to an on-duty supervisor for review prior to the end of tour of duty.

if applicable,

SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES FOR LEVEL 1

PR300.5.2
When contacted by involved personnel, supervisors shall review the general circumstances
of the incident with the involved personnel as necessary, and ensure the facts are consistent
with the reporting level.

The direct supervisor of the officer using a Level 1 use of force shall review and approve in
writing the Level 1 use of force before the end of the shift during which the Level 1 force is
used. Supervisors shall elevate and investigate any use of force that appears to have been
inappropriately categorized as a Level 1 use of force.

Level 1 incidents do not require witness identification.

PR300.6

LEVEL 2, 3 AND 4 USE OF FORCE INCIDENTS

RESPONSIBILITIES OF OFFICERS USING OR OBSERVING A LEVEL 2,

PR300.6.1
LEVEL 3 OR LEVEL 4 USE OF FORCE
All officers using a Level 1 through 4 use of force, and officers observing a Level 2, Level 3,
or Level 4 use of force, shall write a Force Statement before the end of shift, which shall
be included in the Use of Force Report.

The officer's Force Statement shall include:

(a)

a detailed account of the incident from the officer's perspective;

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

Use of Force - 33

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

the reason for the initial police presence;

a specific description of the acts that led to the use of force;

the level of resistance encountered; and

a description of every type of force used.

Officers' Force Statements shall completely and accurately describe the force used or
observed. The use of force reporting policy shall explicitly prohibit the use of conclusive
statements without supporting detail, including "boilerplate" or "pat" language (e.g., "furtive
movement" or "fighting stance") in all statements and reports documenting use of force.

Officers shall be subject to disciplinary action for material omissions or inaccuracies in their
Force Statements.

Officers who use or observe force shall notify their supervisors immediately following any
use of force incident or upon receipt of an allegation of unreasonable or unreported use of
force by any officer.

SUPERVISORS RESPONSIBILITIES - LEVEL 2, LEVEL 3 OR LEVEL 4

PR300.6.2
The direct supervisor of the officer(s) using force, upon notification of a Level 2, Level 3, or
Level 4 use of force incident or allegation of excessive force, shall respond to the location
of occurrence. The direct supervisor of the officer(s) involved in the reportable use of force
incident shall investigate all uses of force, with the exception of:

those incidents involving a serious use of force (Level 4 uses of force);

uses of force indicating apparent criminal conduct by an officer, as defined in this
Agreement;

a use of force incident by NOPD personnel of a rank higher than the supervisor
assigned to investigate the incident; or

a use of force investigation reassigned to FIT by the Superintendent or his designee
or PIB.

A supervisor who was involved in a reportable incident, including by participating in or
ordering the force being investigated, shall not investigate the incident or review the Force
Statements for approval.

For all Level 2 and Level 3 uses of force, the investigating supervisor shall:

respond to the scene, examine the subject of the force for injury, interview the subject
for complaints of pain after advising the subject of his/her rights, and ensure that the
subject receives medical attention from an appropriate medical provider;

notify immediately of the use of force and obtain a use of force tracking number;

identify and collect all relevant evidence and evaluate that evidence to determine
whether the use of force:

1.

2.

was consistent with NOPD policy and/or

raises any policy, training, tactical, or equipment concerns;

ensure that all evidence to establish material facts related to the use of force, including
audio and video records, photographs, and other documentation of injuries or the
absence of injuries is collected;

Use of Force - 34

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

(e)

(f)

(g)

ensure that a canvass for, and interview of, civilian witnesses is conducted.
In
addition, civilian witnesses should be encouraged to provide and sign a written
statement in their own words;
ensure that all officers witnessing a use of force incident by another officer provide a
Force Statement. Officers involved in a use of force incident shall be separated until
interviewed. Group interviews shall be prohibited. Supervisors shall ensure that all
Use of Force Reports identify all officers who were involved in the incident, witnessed
the incident, or were on the scene when it occurred. Supervisors shall not ask officers
or other witnesses leading questions that improperly suggest legal justifications for the
officers' conduct, where such questions are contrary to appropriate law enforcement
techniques. Investigating supervisors shall record all interviews with civilian witnesses
and all follow-up interviews with officers, and shall record all interviews with subjects,
after advising them of their rights and that they seek to question them only about the
use of force. The recording requirements set out in Custodial Interrogations do not
apply to subject interviews regarding the use of force. review all Force Statements
and ensure that all reports include the information required by this Agreement and
NOPD policy; and
consider all relevant evidence, including circumstantial, direct, and physical evidence,
as appropriate, and make credibility determinations, if feasible. Supervisors will make
all reasonable efforts to resolve material inconsistencies between the officer, subject,
and witness statements, as well as inconsistencies between the level of force claimed
by the officer and the subject's injuries. NOPD will train all of its supervisors on the
factors to consider when evaluating credibility, incorporating credibility instructions
provided to jurors. Where a reasonable and trained supervisor would determine
that there may have been misconduct, the supervisor shall immediately notify FIT to
respond to the scene.

Each supervisor shall provide a written gist to the Division Commander by the end of the shift
documenting the supervisor's preliminary determination of the appropriateness of the use
of force, including whether the force was reasonable and within policy; whether the injuries
appear proportionate to the use of force described; and summaries of subject, witness, and
officer statements.

Each supervisor shall complete and document a use of force supervisory investigation using
a supervisor's Use of Force Report within 72 hours of learning of the use of force. Any
extension to this 72-hour deadline must be authorized by a Division Commander. This
Report shall include:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

the supervisor's narrative description of the incident, including a precise description
of the evidence that either justifies or fails to justify the officer's conduct based on the
supervisor's independent review of the facts and circumstances of the incident;
documentation of all evidence that was gathered, including names, phone numbers,
and addresses of witnesses to the incident. In situations in which there are no known
witnesses, the report shall specifically state this fact. In situations in which witnesses
were present but circumstances prevented the author of the report from determining
the identification, phone number or address of those witnesses, the report shall state
the reasons why. The report should also include all available identifying information
for anyone who refuses to provide a statement;
the names of all other NOPD employees witnessing the use of force;
the investigating supervisor's evaluation of the use of force, based on the supervisor's
review of the evidence gathered, including a determination of whether the officer's
actions appear to be within NOPD policy and consistent with state and federal law; and

Use of Force - 35

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

an assessment of the incident for tactical and training implications, including whether
the use of force may have been avoided through the use of de-escalation techniques
or lesser force options, and;

(e)

documentation of any non-disciplinary corrective action taken.

Upon completion of the supervisor's Use of Force Report, the investigating supervisor
shall forward the report through their chain of command to Division Commander, who shall
review the report to ensure that it is complete and that the findings are supported using the
preponderance of the evidence standard. The Division Commander shall order additional
investigation when it appears that there is additional relevant evidence that may assist in
resolving inconsistencies or improve the reliability or credibility of the findings.

Where the findings of the Use of Force Report are not supported by a preponderance of
the evidence, the investigating supervisor's chain of command shall document the reasons
for this determination and shall include this documentation as an addendum to the original
investigation.
the investigating
supervisor regarding the inadequately supported determination and of any investigative
deficiencies that led to it. The Division Commander shall be responsible for the accuracy
and completeness of Use of Force Reports prepared by supervisors under their command.

The investigating supervisor's superior shall counsel

Where an investigating supervisor repeatedly conducts deficient
the
supervisor shall receive the appropriate corrective action, including training, demotion,
and/or removal from a supervisory position in accordance with performance evaluation
procedures and/or Civil Service Rules.

investigations,

Whenever an investigating supervisor, reviewing supervisor, or Division Commander finds
evidence of a use of force indicating apparent criminal conduct by an officer, he or she shall
suspend the force investigation immediately and notify PIB. PIB shall immediately notify
FIT, which will take over the investigation.

When the Division Commander finds that the investigation is complete and the findings are
supported by the evidence, the investigation file shall be forwarded to PIB. PIB shall review
the investigation to ensure that it is complete and that the findings are supported by the
evidence.

At the discretion of the Superintendent, his designee, or PIB, a use of force investigation
may be assigned or re-assigned for investigation to FIT or to another supervisor, whether
within or outside of the District in which the incident occurred, or may be returned to the Unit
for further investigation or analysis. This assignment or re-assignment shall be explained
in writing.

Where, after investigation, a use of force is found to be out of policy, the Superintendent
shall direct and ensure appropriate discipline. Where the use of force indicates policy,
the Superintendent shall ensure also that
training,
necessary training is delivered and that policy,
tactical, or equipment concerns are
resolved.

tactical, or equipment concerns,

RESPONSIBILITIES OF UNINVOLVED PERSONNEL WHO DID

PR300.7
NOT WITNESS THE USE OF FORCE, WHEN DIRECTED BY A SUPERVISOR
The responsibilities of uninvolved personnel who did not witness the use of force, when
directed by a supervisor shall:

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

Use of Force - 36

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

(a) Conduct a reasonable effort to identify and obtain statement from other witnesses
in the proximity of the use of force incident, commensurate with the availability of
resources and the conditions of the event.

(b) Witnesses to a use of force shall be identified to the extent that it is reasonable and
listed in an Incident Report. Statements shall be taken from outside agency personnel
or private person witnesses, when practical. The following criteria shall be used when
listing witnesses:

1.

Outside Agency Personnel Outside agency personnel at the scene of a use of
force incident, whether they witnessed the use of force or not, shall be identified
as follows:

2.

Private Person Witnesses Private persons at the scene of a use of force
incident, whether they witnessed the use of force or not, shall be identified,
when possible, as follows:

(a) Name;

(b) Rank/Title;

(c)

Badge or employee number; and

(d) Department affiliation.

(a) Name;

(b) Sex, Race, DOB;

(c) Contact number(s); and

(d) Home address.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Document in the appropriate report why witness information was not obtained
in situations where it was unsafe or impractical to obtain, (e.g., hostile crowd,
insufficient police resources) or the witness refused to remain at the scene, or
is uncooperative.

Members shall not detain or delay a witness who refuses to remain at the
scene; nonetheless, the witness' physical description, license plate, comments,
or other identifiers shall be obtained when available and documented in the
appropriate report.

Members shall summon a supervisor to the scene in the event a witness refuses
to give a statement or provide identification information.

Complete a Supplemental Statement without discussing the details of the
incident with other personnel on scene. Group reporting is prohibited.

Personnel on scene at the time of the use of force incident, but not involved in or
a witness to the use of force, shall be separately interviewed by the investigating
supervisor, prior to clearing from the incident. Any relevant information revealed
in the interview shall be included in the member's Supplemental Statement.

PLATOON COMMANDER OR COMMANDER OF THE INCIDENT SCENE

PR300.7.1
RESPONSIBILITIES
The platoon commander or commander of the incident scene shall:

(a) Respond to the scene and take Incident Command responsibilities when advised the
incident involves significant department resources or is likely to generate unusual
public interest.

Use of Force - 37

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

(c)

(b) Monitor and ensure the use of force investigation is conducted in a thorough,

methodical, and efficient manner.
Ensure the following notifications are made as soon as possible unless conditions at
the scene make such notification impractical:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Deputy Superintendent of the Public Integrity Bureau;
Police Commander of the Public Integrity Bureau;
Commander of the Force Investigative Team;
Superintendent of Police;
Orleans Parish District Attorney's Office Standby Team for force incidents
resulting in death or injury likely to result in death;
Office of the City Attorney (OCA);
Office of Inspector General (OIG);
City Administrator;
Field Operations Bureau (FOB) and Investigation and Support Bureau (ISB)
Deputy Superintendents; and
10. District/Division Commander.

6.
7.
8.
9.

PR300.8
LEVEL 4 FORCE OR IN-CUSTODY DEATH INCIDENT
Force Investigative Team shall proceed concurrent with an administrative investigation by
the Public Integrity Bureau.

Level 4 force incidents shall be investigated by NOPD's Force Investigation Team.

If the case may proceed criminally, or where NOPD requests a criminal prosecution,
any compelled interview of the subject officers shall be delayed. No other part of the
investigation shall be held in abeyance unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent
in consultation with the agency conducting the criminal investigation.

PUBLIC INTEGRITY BUREAU FORCE INVESTIGATIVE TEAM (FIT)

PR300.8.1
Once the Supervisor of the FIT is notified via the Command Desk or a member's Supervisor
of a level-4 use of force incident or an in custody death, the FIT Supervisor will notify the
members of the squad and respond as outlined in policy/procedure 310 - Force Investigative
Team/Officer Involved Shooting.

DISTRICT ATTORNEY'S (DA) STANDBY TEAM

PR300.8.2
The District Attorney Office and the City Attorney's Office have the authority to conduct their
own independent investigations. They will be available to assist and advise the investigating
officers on all criminal law issues as they relate to the investigation.

PR300.9

LEVEL 4 FORCE INCIDENTS INVOLVING AN OUTSIDE AGENCY

LEVEL 4 FORCE INCIDENTS OCCURRING OUTSIDE THE CITY OF

PR300.9.1
NEW ORLEANS
Upon notification, the platoon commander shall:

(a) Send an on-duty supervisor to the jurisdiction in which the incident occurred unless
the distance makes it impractical. The supervisor shall remain with the member(s)
during the investigation by the outside agency;

Use of Force - 38

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

(b) Notify the Public Integrity Bureau Deputy Superintendent who shall determine if Public
Integrity Bureau Force Investigative Team investigators are to be called-out; and

(c) Notify the Public Integrity Bureau Police Commander who shall determine if the Public

Integrity Bureau Administrative investigators are to be called-out.

The law enforcement agency, which has jurisdiction where the incident occurred, shall
investigation responsibility. The Public
have incident command and primary criminal
Integrity Bureau Force Investigative Team shall only assume primary criminal investigation
responsibility upon the request of the outside agency.

Public Integrity Bureau Force Investigative Team investigators shall request to attend the
interview of NOPD personnel, unless the distance involved makes this impractical.

Public Integrity Bureau Administrative investigators shall request to monitor the interview of
NOPD personnel, unless the distance involved makes this impractical.

LEVEL 4 FORCE INCIDENTS INVOLVING OUTSIDE AGENCY

PR300.9.2
PERSONNEL WITHIN THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS
the criminal
The Public Integrity Bureau Force Investigative Team shall conduct
investigation for level-4 use of force incidents and in custody deaths. The outside agency
may assist at the discretion of the Public Integrity Bureau Deputy Superintendent.

PR300.10
All reviewers shall:

COMMAND REVIEW AND ENDORSEMENT

(a) Review the Incident Report and the Use of Force Report and evaluate these reports for
completeness, accuracy, and quality and ensure reports do not contain "Boilerplate"
or "Pat" language without descriptive or explanatory details of the action. Return any
reports that are incomplete or inadequate and ensure corrections are made;

(b) Order further investigation or additional investigative resources when necessary;

(c)

Evaluate and document whether the use of force was in compliance with Departmental
policy, and determine whether any training and tactical issues need further review,
when appropriate; and

(d) Review the Incident Report and Use of Force Report and forward as appropriate.

PR300.10.1
The reviewing supervisor shall:

LEVEL 1 FORCE REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES

(a) Conduct a thorough review of all documents to ensure completeness, accuracy, and

quality.

Incomplete or
clarification.

(b)

(c)

inadequate reports shall be returned for additional details or

Ensure the Use of Force Report contains the appropriate, corresponding Item
Number.

(d) Upon approval, sign the appropriate Level 1 Reviewer box on the Use of Force Report

1.

2.

Ensure the Use of Force Report contains the original Use of Force Report with
attached supplemental statements

A copy of the appropriate report (e.g., Incident Report or field interview card)

Use of Force - 39

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

New Orleans Police Department
Procedure Manual

Use of Force

3.

Upon approval, sign the appropriate Level 1 Reviewer box on the Use of Force
Report

PR300.10.2
The Public Integrity Bureau Force Investigative Team (FIT) supervisor shall:

LEVEL 4 FORCE REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES

(a) Ensure the investigation is conducted and assigned to a Public Integrity FIT

investigator who shall prepare an Incident Report.

(b) Review and forward the Incident Report to the Police Commander of the Public

Integrity Bureau.

The Public Integrity Bureau Police Commander shall:

(a) Ensure Public Integrity Bureau Administrative investigators have conducted a
complete use of force investigation, independent of the criminal investigation, and
prepared a Use of Force or In-Custody Death Report in accordance with PIB Policy
and Procedure

(b) Review and forward the Incident Report and the Use of Force Report to the Deputy

Superintendent of the Public Integrity Bureau.

(c)

Provide an oral report to the Superintendent of Police within 24 hours of the incident.

PR300.11 OFFICER'S BILL OF RIGHTS
Nothing in this procedure shall preclude a member of the police department from taking
reasonable action(s) to ensure officer safety or the public's safety.

All members shall be afforded all substantive and procedural rights and remedies as
provided by law, including without limitation those laws granted by the Officers' Bill of
Rights.

The Superintendent of Police, after consulting with members of the Command Staff and
Public Integrity Bureau shall determine if the member(s) should be returned to their regular
assignment, but only after completion of any mandatory debriefing by the department's
psychologist, and any recommended retraining.

Any determination by the Superintendent not
to return an officer(s) to their regular
assignment and to continue their reassignment is administrative only and in no way shall
be considered punitive

TRAINING
PR300.12
Commanders,
investigators, and supervisors shall complete a Department approved
training course regarding the Departmental Use of Force Policy and reporting and
investigating use of force incidents prior to conducting any use of force investigation.
The training course shall include provisions of the NOPD Operations Manual Chapters
related to RECEIVING AND PROCESSING COMPLAINTS AGAINST DEPARTMENT
PERSONNEL OR PROCEDURES and CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS INVOLVING
ACTIVE LAW ENFORCEMENT OR A MEMBER OF THE DEPARTMENT.

Adopted: 2013/06/23 © 1995-2013 Lexipol, LLC

Use of Force - 40

