 

 

 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

Office with Primary 
Responsibility: 

CTA 

Office(s) with Secondary 
Responsibilities: 

Forms Referenced in Procedure: 

PSC, PNC, STC, TSC, MCC 

SAPD Form #62-UOF  
SAPD Form #62 

Effective Date: 
Prior Revision Date: 

Number of Pages: 

October 24, 2014 
July 18, 2012 
 
9 

Related Procedures: 

303, 309, 408, 512, 601, 605, 908 

 
.02  POLICY 
 

.01  INTRODUCTION 
 

 

 
The procedure provides officers with guidelines on the use of non-deadly and deadly force.  This procedure also explains 
the process officers shall follow for reporting use of force incidents. 
 

 
A.  The  San  Antonio  Police  Department  requires  its  officers  to  exhibit  a  sense  of  prudent  judgment  derived  from 
departmental training, acquired knowledge, skills, and ability in the exercise or application of any level of force. 
 

 
B.  Officers shall use only the level of force necessary to accomplish a lawful police objective.  Any time force is used, 

the officer shall apply a level of force reasonable for the situation.       
 

 
C.  The San Antonio Police Department requires all officers to document use of  force incidents on SAPD Form #62-
UOF, Use of Force Report, in accordance with this procedure.  The Department also requires supervisors to respond 
to  the  scene  of  use  of  force  incidents  and  to  review  all  Use  of  Force  Reports,  to  ensure  the  application  of  force 
conforms to established guidelines and departmental policy and procedures. 

 

 
.03  DISCUSSION 
 

 
A.  The sanctity of human life and individual liberties are immeasurable elements of modern society which vests police 
officers  with  the  responsibility  for  the  preservation  and  protection  of  its  paramount  values.    In  the  pursuit  of  this 
responsibility, officers maintain the understanding the protection of property and apprehension of criminal offenders 
is subservient to the protection of life, including their own. 
 

 
B.  In the course of discharging their duty, police officers are often confronted with situations requiring some degree of 
force to be exercised in order to effectively maintain public order and safety.  This may be achieved on an ascending 
scale  of  the  officer’s  presence,  verbal  communications,  open/empty  hands  control,  physical  force,  intermediate 
weapon and deadly force, according to and proportional with the circumstances of the situation.  The application of 
force  must  be  conducted  in  a  manner  reasonable  and  commensurate  to  achieving  a  level  of  control  that  cannot 
otherwise be obtained through the use of other alternatives. 
 

 
C.  Although the use of a reasonable amount of force is authorized in appropriate circumstances, such as those involving 
the  protection  of  the  officer  or  others  from  bodily  harm,  officers  must  be  aware  unnecessary  or  excessive  force 
violates Federal Statues, the Texas Penal Code and departmental policy. 

 

 
.04  TERMINOLOGY (For specific use within this procedure, see Glossary) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Active Resistance  
 
 
Brandishing/Displaying Firearm 
 
 
Electronic Control Devices (ECD)   
Intermediate Weapon   
 
 
Officer’s Presence                                  Oleoresin Capsicum (OC)                      Open/Empty Hands Control 
Passive Resistance 
 
 
Reasonable Force                                    Takedowns 

Anti Felon Identification (AFID) 
Deadly Force 
Force 
 
 
Lateral Vascular Neck Restraint            Non-deadly Force  

Approved Weapon 
Drive Stun Mode 
 
Injury 

Probe Mode   
Verbal Communications 

Physical Force 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  Weapon 
 
 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 1 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

Lateral  Vascular  Neck  Restraint  (LVNR)  -  The lateral  vascular  neck  restraint  (LVNR),  commonly  known  as  a  sleeper 
hold, or carotid chokehold,  is a general term  for  a grappling hold that critically reduces  or prevents either air (choking) or 
blood (strangling) from passing through the neck of an opponent. The restriction may be of one or both and depends on the 
hold used and the reaction of the victim. 
 
.05  APPLICATION OF FORCE 
 

 
A.  With the exception of an officer’s presence or verbal communications, the use of any type of force is not justified in 

response to verbal provocation alone. 
 

 
B.  Police officers finding it necessary to use force to achieve a lawful police objective shall use a reasonable amount of 
force to affect the objective.  However, nothing in this procedure is interpreted to mean an officer must prolong any 
combat  or  struggle  in  order  to  satisfy  any  element  of  escalation  rather  than  resort  to  a  reasonable  method  that 
resolves the situation in the safest and most expedient fashion. 
 

 
C.  The use of force by an officer can be viewed as a matrix of force options used in response to a subject’s actions and 
behavior.  The force  matrix illustrates the relationship between a subject’s actions and the  officer’s response.   As 
force  options  move  from  lesser  to  greater  levels,  the  risk  of  injury  to  the  suspects  and/or  officers  increase.    The 
matrix is designed to assist officers in understanding how force can escalate.   

OFFICER’S PERCEPTION OF SUSPECT’S ACTIONS 

OFFICER’S 
RESPONSE 

Compliant 
(Cooperative) 

Passive Resistant 

Active Resistant 

Imminent Assault 
(Bodily Injury) 

Imminent Serious 
Bodily 
Injury/Death 

Officer’s Presence 

Open/Empty Hands 
Control 

 
Verbal Communications   
 
 
 
 

Intermediate Weapon 

Physical Force 

Deadly Force 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

D.  An officer should consider the following factors when assessing the need to use force: 
 

 

Is the suspect submitting peacefully or resisting? 
 
Is the suspect armed? 
 

1. 
 
2. 
 
3.  What is the nature of the crime? 
 
4.  Does the suspect have a previous arrest record or history showing violence? 
 
5.  Number of suspects involved? 
 
6.  How much support from other officers is available? 

 

 

 

 

 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 2 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

 

F.  De-escalation of force: 

 

 

E.  A weapon is not displayed or brandished as a threat unless its potential use in the situation would be reasonable, or if 
the  circumstances  clearly  call  for  the  use  of  a  weapon  to  control  a  dangerous  situation,  or  in  accordance  with 
Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code. 

 

 

 

 

if possible. 

control.  
 

force. 
 

 
1.  When employing necessary force, which is greater than an officer’s presence, and this level of force is being 
employed to achieve a lawful police objective, officers shall de-escalate their use of force options when a 
subject’s actions indicate that the initial use of force has achieved an acceptable level of compliance by a 
subject. 
 
a. 

If  circumstances  allow,  Officers  should    attempt  to  de-escalate  tense  situations  through  “advisements, 
warnings, verbal persuasion, and other tactics” to reduce the need for force. 

 

 

 
2.  The de-escalation of force principle requires an officer to decrease the scope, or intensity of physical force 

being employed against a subject only when the resisting or non-compliant subject clearly demonstrates that 
he or she has decreased the level of resistance against an officer who is attempting to achieve a lawful police 
objective.  
 

 

3.  The de-escalation of force can be viewed as a direct relationship between a subject’s resistance level to an 
officer’s use of force level. As a subject decreases his or her level of resistance, the responding officer also 
decreases the level of force required to gain compliance.    

G.   Any officer present and observing another officer using force that is clearly beyond that which is reasonable under 
the circumstances shall, when in a position to do so, safely intercede to prevent the use of such excessive force. 
Officers shall immediately report these observations to a supervisor. 

.06  USE OF NON-DEADLY FORCE 
 

 
A.  When attempting to affect an arrest, officers should use verbal communications prior to the use of non-deadly force, 

 
B.  If verbal communication has been exhausted or proven ineffective, officers are authorized to use open/empty hands 

 
C.  If  an  open/empty  hands  control  has  been  exhausted  or  proven  ineffective,  officers  are  authorized  to  use  physical 

 
D.  If  physical  force  has  proven  ineffective  or  is  not  a  reasonable  option  based  upon  the  circumstances,  officers  are 
authorized  to  use  an  intermediate  weapon  to  affect  an  arrest.    Officers  using  intermediate  weapons  must  be 
authorized to carry such weapons in accordance with GM Procedure 309, Weapons. 
 

 
E.  Officers may resort to the use of an approved intermediate weapon when: 
 

 

 

 
In self-defense or defense of a third person; 
 

1.  Lesser methods have failed; 
 
2. 
 
3.  Subduing or controlling a violent subject; 
 
4.  Subduing an actively resisting actor; or 
 
5.  Physical force has proven ineffective or is not a reasonable option based upon the circumstances.  

 

 

F.  Oleoresin Capsicum (OC) Spray/Gel and/or Electronic Control Device (ECD) 
 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 3 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

 

 

 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

1.  Only officers  who have successfully completed a training course and are certified in the use of  OC  spray/gel 
and/or  an  ECD  are  authorized  to  carry  and  use  OC  spray/gel  and/  or  ECD  as  an  intermediate  weapon.  
Additionally, only officers who have also successfully completed a 40 hour Crisis Intervention Training course 
are authorized to carry an ECD. 
 

 
2.  Officers shall only carry and use department-issued OC spray/gel and/or ECDs.   
 
3.  Officers shall carry the OC spray/gel and /or ECD in an authorized carrier. 
 
4.  OC spray/gel and /or ECD shall not be brandished, displayed, or pointed at a subject in an intimidating manner 

unless an officer is attempting to prevent further escalation of force. 
 

 
5.  Officers using OC Spray/Gel and/or ECD: 

 

 

 

 

a.  Oleoresin Capsicum Spray/Gel 

(1)  As  with  any  other  type  of  force,  officers  will  end  application  of  OC  Spray/Gel  when  the  subject 
discontinues  resistance  or  aggression.    OC  Spray  Spray/Gel  is  irritating  to  the  eyes,  nose,  and  skin.  
Any time OC Spray/Gel is used to control or subdue an actively resisting or violent subject, the officer 
will ensure the subject is decontaminated as soon as possible, to reduce the  discomfort caused by the 
OC Spray/Gel.  Decontamination consists of the application of water to the subject’s eyes and face.   

(2)  Decontaminate prisoners exposed to OC Spray/Gel before being transported to the Detention Center.  

Prisoners exposed to OC spray/gel, will be observed by an officer for 45 minutes to ensure the prisoner 
does not require medical attention.  If in the officer’s opinion, the prisoner appears to be in severe pain,  
discomfort, or exhibits unusual symptoms such as unconsciousness, profuse sweating, chest pain or 
slow, shallow breathing, the officer shall immediately request EMS to the scene.   
 

 
(3)  The decontamination process and amount of time the prisoner was observed will be documented in the 

officer’s report and on the SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report. 

b. 

 
 Electronic Control Devices (ECD) will be used in accordance with GM Procedure 512, Electronic Control 
Devices. 

 
.07  USE OF DEADLY FORCE 
 

 

 

 

 
A.  This section applies to all forms of deadly force, regardless of the type of instrument or weapon used. 
 
B.  The use of deadly force is authorized only to protect an officer or another person from what is reasonably believed 

 

to be an immediate threat of death or serious bodily injury. 

1.  An officer with an honest and sincere personal belief his life or the life of another person is in imminent danger 

 
2. 

is justified in using deadly force to preserve that life. 
 
Justification for the use of deadly force is determined by the facts known or perceived by the officer at the time 
the deadly force is employed. 

 
C.  The use of deadly force against one who is fleeing from custody, or who is fleeing immediately after committing an 
offense, is prohibited unless the officer has probable cause to believe the suspect poses an imminent threat of  death 
or serious bodily injury to the officer or a third party. 
 

 
D.  A lateral vascular neck restraint (LVNR) shall not be used unless deadly force is authorized. 
 
E.    Approved  firearms  are  intended  to  be  used  as  defensive  instruments  to  prevent  an  assailant  from  completing  a 

potentially deadly act.  A firearm is discharged with the intent to stop or incapacitate.  

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 4 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

 

 

 

 

 

 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

 

 
F.  Firearms are not discharged under the following circumstances: 
 

1.  As a warning shot; 
 
2.  When it appears likely a non-participant may be injured; or 

 

 

 

3.  At  or  from  a  moving  vehicle,  except  as  the  ultimate  measure  of  self-defense  or  defense  of  another.    Officers 
should  employ  all  reasonable  means  available  to  move  to  an  area  of  safety  if  the  vehicle  becomes  a  threat, 
including retreating from the threat, if practical. 

 

 
.08  SHOULDER WEAPON DEPLOYMENT 

 

A. 

 

 

 

 

If physical force and the use of intermediate weapons have proven ineffective or are not reasonable options based 
upon the circumstances, officers authorized to deploy and use a department approved shoulder weapon may do so 
to neutralize a threat that poses an imminent danger of serious bodily injury or death to any person. 
 

B.  Officers shall only utilize a shoulder weapon consistent with the training received and in accordance with all GM 

Procedures and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
 

C.  A  shoulder  weapon  is  intended  to  augment  primary  and  approved  handguns  under  circumstances  where  a  hand 
held weapon is not sufficient to neutralize a perceived threat that may result in serious bodily injury or death. 

1.  A shoulder weapon may be used or deployed at a scene where it is requested by an officer or supervisor who is 

in a position to articulate the need for such support; and  

2.  Supervisors will ensure compliance with section .12 of this procedure. 

D.  The  decision  to  deploy  or  use  a  shoulder  weapon  will  be  dependent  upon  the  actions  of  the  subject,  the  threat 

facing the officer, and the totality of circumstances surrounding an incident. 
 

 

E.  As  with  any  other  type  of  force,  officers  will  end  the  use  of  a  shoulder  weapon  when  the  subject  discontinues 
resistance,  aggression,  or  when  the  threat  has  been  sufficiently  neutralized  and  a  shoulder  weapon  is  no  longer 
necessary to affect a police response. 
 

 

F.  Shoulder weapons should not be brandished, displayed, or pointed at a subject in an intimidating manner unless an 
officer  is  attempting  to  prevent  further  escalation  of  force,  or  finds  it  necessary  to  discharge  the  weapon  to 
neutralize a threat of serious bodily injury or death to any person. 
 

 

G.  More than one officer may deploy a shoulder weapon at a scene as dictated by the circumstances, keeping in mind 

the location of other officers, other persons, and other variables involved in the situation.   
 

 

H.  As soon as practical, an officer will immediately notify the Communications Unit of a shoulder weapon discharge 

and advise on whether there are any hits or injuries.  
 
Improper handling or inappropriate uses of a shoulder weapon  which may result in disciplinary action.  
 

I. 

 
.09  MEDICAL TREATMENT 
 

 
A.  Prisoners, who are injured as a result of an officer’s use of force, either physical, non-deadly, or deadly force, are 

provided immediate medical treatment in accordance with GM Procedure 601, Prisoners.  
 

 
B.  Officers  having  prisoners  who  have  been  exposed  to  oleoresin  capsicum  (OC)  Spray/Gel  and/or  ECD  utilization, 

shall comply with Subsection .06 F of this procedure. 

 

 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 5 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.10  USE OF FORCE REPORT RESPONSIBILITIES 
 

 
A.  Officers shall complete SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report, under the following circumstances: 
 

1.  Any force used by an officer greater than an open/empty hands control technique, as listed in Subsection .05C; 
 
2.  Any force used by an officer which causes an individual to impact the ground/floor, object, or another person  
(e.g. a push, leg sweep, hip throw, etc.).  This does not include those situations where a suspect is directed and 
voluntarily goes to their knees or assumes a prone position on the floor, prior to being handcuffed; 

 

 
3.  Any force used by an officer that causes injury to an individual, which requires medical treatment;  
 
4.  Any force used by an officer that causes death to an individual; 
 
5.  Discharging a firearm at an individual to accomplish a lawful police objective; 
 
6.  The use of an intermediate weapon by an officer; and 
 
7.  When a police canine bites an individual. 

 

 
B.  When  a  prisoner  offers  resistance  during  an  arrest  and  the  officer  does  not  use  more  than  an  open/empty  hands 
control, the officer will check the appropriate box on the booking slip.  The information gathered on the suspect’s 
resistance will be used for statistical purposes. 
 

 
C.  Although an officer’s presence, verbal communication, open/empty hands control techniques, or the brandishing or 
displaying of a weapon does not require the completion of SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report, the details 
must be documented in the officer’s report. 

 
 
D.  The discharging of a firearm in order to destroy an animal, in accordance with GM Procedure 605, Subsection .02F, 

does not require the completion of SAPD Form #62-UOF. 

 

 
.11  OFFICER RESPONSIBILITIES 
 

 
A.  Each officer using force during an incident which requires them to complete SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force 

Report, in accordance with Section .09 of this procedure shall: 

1.  Notify the supervisor of the type of force used and whether the prisoner received any type of injury as a result 

of the use of force. 
 

 
2.  Request the supervisor to respond to the scene. 

a.  An  officer  may  relocate  the  prisoner  prior  to  the  arrival  of  a  supervisor  due  to  a  threat  of  violence  or 

exigent circumstances. 
 
If an officer does relocate from the scene, he shall notify the dispatcher and the responding supervisor.   

 
b. 

 
3.  Complete SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report, documenting the specific type of force the officer used. 
 
4.  Complete a detailed, accurate offense/incident report describing the force used and the circumstances and facts 

 

surrounding the use of force. 
 

 
5.  Complete SAPD Form #62, Injured Prisoners Report, for those injured prisoners who receive medical treatment 

at a hospital. 
 

 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 6 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

 

6.  Attach a  copy of the offense/incident report to the  completed SAPD Form #62-UOF,  Use of Force Report  as 
well as the SAPD Form #62, Injured Prisoners Report and give it to the supervisory officer who was notified of 
the use of force incident. 

 

 
B.  The SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report shall be completed before the officer ends his tour of duty. 

 
.12  SUPERVISORS’ RESPONSIBILITIES 
 

 
A.  Supervisory  officers  who  are  notified  of  a  use  of  force  incident,  which  requires  a  SAPD  Form  #62-UOF,  Use  of 

Force Report in accordance with Section .09 of this procedure shall:   
 
1.  Respond to the scene;  
 
2.  Contact the officer(s) involved in the use of force; and 
 
3.  Request  a  UEDI  to  photograph  the  person  who  had  the  force  used  against  them.  If  a  UEDI  is  unavailable  a 
Crime  Scene  Unit  Investigator  shall  be  requested.    In  their  absence,  the  responding  supervisor  will  take  the 
photos. 

 

 

 

a.  The photographs shall include photos of any documented, visible or alleged injuries. 
 
b.  The photographs shall take place as soon as practical after the incident. 
 
c.  The photographs will be handled in accordance with GM Procedure 408, Digital Photography. 

 

 

 

 
B.  If a supervisor from the section is not available to respond to the scene of a use of force incident the dispatcher will 

send any available supervisor. 
 

 
C.  The supervisor shall evaluate the circumstances surrounding the use of force incident and: 
 

Interview the prisoner, when available; 
 

1. 
 
2.  Determine  and  ensure  the  use  of  force  incident  meets  the  criteria,  which  requires  completion  of  the  Use  of 

Force Report; 
 

 
3.  Determine if departmental policies and procedures were followed; 
 
4.  Ensure proper medical treatment has been offered to the prisoner, and if oleoresin capsicum (OC) spray/gel was 

 

used, the decontamination process is conducted;  

                      
5.  When an ECD has been utilized and the subject received an electrical charge, the supervisor relieves the officer 
of his ECD. The sergeant downloads the ECD’s internal information onto the ECD computer tracking system.  
Afterward,  the  supervisor  returns  the  ECD  to  the  officer  as  soon  as  possible.    The  sergeant  also  issues  the 
officer replacement cartridges when applicable; 
 

 
 
6.  Ensure  all  officers  who  use  force,  in  accordance  with  Subsection  .09A  during  the  incident,  complete  SAPD 

 

Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report. 

 
D.  Procedural  violations  identified  by  the  supervisor  will  be  handled  in  accordance  with  GM  Procedure  303, 
Disciplinary Procedures.  Supervisors shall route line complaint disposition reports or formal preliminary complaint 
investigation packets through the chain of command. 
 
If the officer(s) is unable to complete the SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report, the supervisor shall prepare 
the report based on available information. 

 
E. 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 7 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
F.  The  supervisory  officer  receiving  SAPD  Form  #62-UOF,  Use  of  Force  Report,  shall  complete  the  appropriate 

section of the report and route the original report to the Internal Affairs Unit. 
 

G.  Supervisors  not  responding  to  any  use  of  force  incident,  as  outlined  in  Subsection  .11A  of  this  procedure,  shall 
document  in  a  report  the  reason  he  did  not  respond.    This  report  will  be  forwarded  to  his  division  commander 
through the chain of command. 

.13  USE OF FORCE ANALYSIS 

A.  The Use of Force Reports will be analyzed annually by the Internal Affairs Unit and the data will be used to prepare 

the Formal Cases and Line Complaints Report for the Chief of Police. 

1.  The Chief of Police shall designate the Deputy Chief assigned to the Major Crimes and Intelligence Division 

to serve as the central point of contact for information, and will forward any recommendations for program 
improvements, as needed. 
 

2.  The Major Crimes and Intelligence Division Deputy Chief will submit a report every February 28th which will 
highlight significant findings in the Formal Cases and Line Complaints Report and will contain practices or 
policies that were changed or added during the reporting year (Jan 1st – Dec 31st).  
 

 

3.  The Major Crimes and Intelligence Division Deputy Chief will meet as needed with the commanders of 

Internal Affairs, Training Academy, or any other commander in order to identify use of force trends, training, 
equipment, or policy issues.  
 

 

 

B.  An analysis of vehicle pursuits will be completed in accordance with GM Procedure 609, Emergency Vehicle 

Operations. 
 

 

.14  POST EVENT PROCEDURES 
 

Force Report; 

 

database. 

 

 
A.  SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force Report, shall be reviewed by a supervisor assigned to the Internal Affairs Unit 

to ensure: 
 
1.  The type of force documented meets the criteria required for the completion of SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of 

2.  Whether departmental policies and procedures were followed; 
 
3.  The  SAPD Form #62-UOF,  Use of Force Report, is completed properly and is entered into the  Use of Force 

 

B.  If the Internal Affairs Unit Supervisor determines the incident documented on SAPD Form #62-UOF, Use of Force 
Report,  does  not  meet  the  criteria  for  the  completion  of  the  SAPD  Form  #62-UOF,  or  requires  corrections,  the 
Internal Affairs Unit Supervisor shall retain a copy of the SAPD Form #62-UOF and return the original, through the 
chain of command, to the supervisor who completed the report. 
 

 
 
C.  The field supervisor receiving a SAPD Form #62-UOF for clarification of details or corrections shall complete the 
Use of Force Clarification Form and return the form to their Division Commander who will forward the report to 
the Internal Affairs Unit. 
 

 
D.  The Internal Affairs Unit Supervisor will review the Use of Force Clarification Form and determine if the incident 
meets  the  criteria  for  completion  of  a  SAPD  Form  #62-UOF,  Use  of  Force  Report.    The  Use  of  Force  Report  is 
either accepted and entered into the Use of Force database, or is rejected and filed in the Internal Affairs Unit as a 
rejected Use of Force Report. 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 8 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

San Antonio Police Department 
GENERAL MANUAL 
 
Procedure 501 – Use of Force 

 

 

 

 
E.  Officers  involved  in  the  use  of  deadly  force  shall  be  placed  on  administrative  duty  or  administrative  leave  in 

accordance with GM Procedure 908, Mandatory Reassignment. 

 

 
 
 
 

General Manual Procedures – Section 500 Arrest Procedures 

 

               

          Page 9 of 9 

 

                         

                                                  Effective Date: October 24, 2014 

